
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ900426-0110
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
900426-0110.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Milken Faces Myriad Civil Suits
   ----
   By Ellen Joan Pollock and Ann Hagedorn
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/26/90
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2
</SO>
<IN>
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)
BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<GV>
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
</GV>
<LP>
   To hear some shareholder attorneys talk, Michael Milken's
next appearance should be in federal bankruptcy court.
   Shareholders and other investors have filed so many suits
against him, seeking billions of dollars, that even a fortune
as big as Mr. Milken's may be vulnerable, the attorneys say.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Attorneys for Mr. Milken dismiss the suggestion as absurd
and say Mr. Milken's potential liability won't be nearly so
extensive. While some shareholder attorneys routinely file
multimillion-dollar suits whenever a takeover is announced or
the market drops, the suits against Mr. Milken seem to be
much more likely to succeed than most.
   Consider:
   -- Mr. Milken's guilty plea to six felony counts Tuesday
makes it impossible for him to claim in civil cases that he
was guilty of no market fraud. In each case, the former junk
bond impresario will be viewed as a convicted felon.
   -- So much evidence against him has already been gathered
by federal prosecutors and the Securities and Exchange
Commission, much of which will eventually become available to
shareholder lawyers, that plaintiffs' attorneys will have to
do relatively little sleuthing of their own.
   -- While Mr. Milken didn't plead guilty to any
racketeering counts, recent court cases have made it
increasingly easy to show a so-called pattern of racketeering
in civil cases. Shareholders have sued Mr. Milken under the
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law, and RICO
damages are automatically tripled.
   -- The SEC's funds to compensate victims of market
wrongdoing by Mr. Milken, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and
convicted abritrager Ivan F. Boesky, while stocked with more
than $600 million, cannot be used to pay tripled damages or
punitive damages. Thus, any judgment against Mr. Milken above
mere compensatory damages would have to come out of his own
pocket. Drexel was Mr. Milken's former employer. The
securities firm has filed for bankruptcy-court protection.
   All of this sounds like good news to Richard Greenfield,
one of the nation's top shareholder lawyers. As he eagerly
scanned the early wire reports of the plea Tuesday, Mr.
Greenfield said Mr. Milken should seriously contemplate
filing for bankruptcy-court protection. "It's a very real
possibility," said Mr. Greenfield, who has filed several
cases against Mr. Milken. "If I were in his shoes, I'd want
to start over on Day One. By the time he's out of jail, it's
all over."
   Steven Rosenfeld, an attorney for Mr. Milken, says there
are "no plans whatsoever" for his client to seek
bankruptcy-court protection. The partner in the New York law
firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind Wharton &amp; Garrison says there is
"nothing particularly remarkable" about the allegations in
the lawsuits. "There is a word processor somewhere that spews
out the same . . . allegations," Mr. Rosenfeld says. "I view
that as a plaintiff tactic."
   As his partner Arthur Liman said the day before, Mr.
Rosenfeld said the Milken camp believes the $400 million Mr.
Milken is required to provide the SEC for civil restitution
will more than cover any legitimate claims.
   Still, the Milken team faces a morass of suits. One of the
most sweeping, filed last month in Los Angeles by
shareholders of Unocal Corp., accuses Mr. Milken, Drexel and
many major takeover artists of the 1980s of a massive
conspiracy that defrauded shareholders in takeover targets.
   Mr. Greenfield's firm filed the suit along with plaintiff
lawyer William S. Lerach of the shareholder law firm of
Milberg Weiss Bershad Specthrie and Lerach. It alleges a
back-scratching arrangement by which Mr. Milken teamed up
with high-profile corporate raiders to manipulate stock
prices in huge acquisitions. The suit, which seeks $2.3
billion in trebled damages, claims that more than 70
defendants violated the RICO law.
   Under the alleged arrangement, Mr. Milken shared "secret
information with market operatives" and backed the takeover
attempts of such raiders as Carl Icahn, Ronald Perelman, T.
Boone Pickens and others. According to the allegations, a
raider would typically tell Mr. Milken he wanted to take over
a particular company, and Mr. Milken would then issue junk
bonds for the raider's companies and arrange for other
raiders to buy the bonds. The raiders felt obligated to buy
the bonds because they wanted Mr. Milken to fund their future
takeover attempts, the suit says. Meanwhile, at Mr. Milken's
direction, arbitragers would purchase big blocks of stock in
the target company with guarantees against loss provided by
Mr. Milken, the suit claims.
   While the Unocal suit claims enormous damages to
shareholders, a suit filed by Mr. Greenfield's firm in
February may be even broader. The firm sued on behalf of at
least 10,000 class members who purchased high-yield,
high-risk bonds underwritten by and sold through Drexel. They
charged that the junk bond market was rigged, that prices
were artificially determined and that without Mr. Milken to
act as "puppeteer," the market fell apart. Action in this
case is stalled for procedural reasons.
   Also pending are a multitude of civil cases lodged in the
past three years against Mr. Boesky, Drexel, Mr. Milken and
others that accuse the defendants of insider trading, stock
manipulation and other securities law violations. Many of
these cases are pending in federal court in New York, where
pretrial fact-finding has been slowed because of the
unavailability of Mr. Boesky, Mr. Milken and others to
testify at depositions. Thus far, federal prosecutors have
gotten the judge to deny the plaintiffs' lawyers access to
these witnesses while criminal investigations are being
pursued. But at some point, such a partial stay will
presumably be lifted.
   Finally, a sprinkling of cases across the country target
Mr. Milken among many other defendants in cases alleging that
savings and loans associations and other companies suffered
losses because they purchased large portfolios of Drexel's
junk bonds as part of back-scratching arrangements with Mr.
Milken.
   The strength of the plaintiffs' various charges are
difficult to gauge. Mr. Greenfield likens them to the
asbestos cases that led to the Chapter 11 bankruptcy-court
filing of Manville Corp., the giant asbestos manufacturer. He
says he believes that once one case "breaks through" to
trial, Mr. Milken will have no choice but to start settling
the rest of the cases.
   But a spokesman for Mr. Pickens's Mesa Petroleum Co., a
defendant in the Unocal case, calls the allegations "silly
stuff. They've taken any name that's appeared next to
Boesky's or {Boyd} Jefferies's. . . . They're throwing names
in the soup and alleging a scheme that is pure nonsense." Mr.
Jefferies, a former brokerage firm chief in Los Angles
pleaded guilty to two felony counts of breaking securities
laws in April 1987.
   Says attorney James Conroy, commenting on behalf of Revlon
Group Inc. Chairman Mr. Perelman and his MacAndrews &amp; Forbes
Holdings Inc., "The suit casts a net very broadly and names a
lot of people in the process. We don't belong there because
there is no basis in fact for the allegations."
   A civil case is always easier to prove than a criminal
case because the civil plaintiff doesn't have to prove his
charges beyond a reasonable doubt. Instead he must show only
that the accusations are more likely than not to be correct.
Nonetheless, the plaintiff's lawyers agree that winning a
trial against Mr. Milken wouldn't be easy.
   "It can't be proven by a handful of witnesses and a
handful of documents," says Mr. Greenfield. Instead, the
lawyers must attempt to show juries patterns of trades in
which prices appear to be rigged and raise the issue of how
the securities were priced. The defendants, says R. Bruce
McNew, a partner in Mr. Greenfield's firm, "have to have an
innocent explanation for what they've done. In the process of
proving your case, you then take apart their explanation."
   Alan Bromberg, a law professor at Southern Methodist
University, says showing a chain of bond purchases doesn't
necessarily prove that Mr. Milken was in control of the
sellers and buyers, "but it does permit that inference." The
outcome of the case will depend on whether the jury believes
there was a conspiracy or the sellers and purchasers of bonds
made independent judgments.
   Mr. Bromberg and others assert that Mr. Liman, Mr.
Milken's principal lawyer, negotiated to make the plea
agreement narrow enough so that little of what Mr. Milken
admitted to can be used against him in the civil suits. "I
suspect they fought hard on that, and my guess is they were
pretty successful at it," Mr. Bromberg says.
   However, a little-noticed provision in the plea agreement
could prove to be invaluable to civil plaintiffs. Prosecutors
extracted a promise from Mr. Milken that he wouldn't attempt
to block them from including in their sentencing memo many
additional charges of wrongdoing to which he didn't plead
guilty.
   Recently Robert Freeman, former Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. head
of arbitrage, successfully blocked inclusion of such broader
allegations in the government's sentencing memo. Thus, the
government's full case against Mr. Freeman, who had pleaded
guilty to just one insider trading charge, was kept from
public view.
   In the Milken case, however, prosecutors are expected to
outline a broad scheme of alleged wrongdoing, involving a
wide range of companies and securities. Those charges could
be exceedingly helpful to plainitffs lawyers building civil
cases against him.
   Realistically, it's highly unlikely that the civil cases
against Mr. Milken will ever go to trial. Most shareholder
cases are settled, and Mr. Greenfield says he has had only
two jury trials in the past six years, while handling scores
of suits.
   One reason for this is that plaintiffs' lawyers typically
don't charge hourly rates. Instead they charge their clients
for a percentage of the settlement or jury award, generally
20% to 30%. Therefore, it is often to their benefit to
dispose of cases as quickly as possible.
   But settlements work only if both sides believe they are
making a fair compromise, considering what the damages might
be if the case went to trial. And, in the Milken litigation,
settling so many high-stakes cases could be a long and tricky
process in itself.
   ---
           Major Actions Against Milken, Others
                                                                                                       

   CASE:
   Unocal Corp. Shareholder Derivative Suit
                                                                                                       

   BACKGROUND:
   Filed by shareholders on behalf of Unocal, this civil RICO
suit seeks to recoup losses allegedly incurred by the
petroleum giant and its shareholders during T. Boone
Pickens's unsuccessful attempt to gain control of the company
in 1985. The suit alleges that Mr. Milken systematically
conspired with takeover professionals to manipulate stock
prices in takeovers.
                                                                                                       

   DEFENDANTS:
   Defendants include Michael and Lori Milken, T. Boone
Pickens, Paul Bilzerian, Carl Icahn, Irwin Jacobs, Ronald
Perelman and many others.
                                                                                                       

   AMOUNT: $2.3 billion
                                                                                                       

   STATUS: Pending in U.S. District Court, Los Angeles
   ---
   CASE:
   Sheffield v. Milken: "The Junk Bond Case"
                                                                                                       

   BACKGROUND:
   Filed on behalf of individuals who purchased junk bonds
underwritten and sold through Drexel, the suit alleges that
Mr. Milken created a "daisy chain" of investors who would buy
and sell Drexel-underwritten bonds at Mr. Milkens direction.
The case also claims that without Mr. Milken to act as
"puppeteer," the junk market has since become "disorderly."
The potential class of plaintiffs is believed to include at
least 10,000 members.
                                                                                                       

   DEFENDANTS:
   Defendants include Mr. Milken, Frederick Joseph, Robert
Linton and Drexel entities.
                                                                                                       

   AMOUNT: Unstated
                                                                                                       

   STATUS: Pending in Delaware chancery court.
   ---
   CASE:
   Consolidated Boesky-Drexel-Milken Cases
                                                                                                       

   BACKGROUND:
   Including at least 30 cases alleging insider trading,
stock manipulation and other securities violations, these
suits relate to transactions involving at least 14 other
companies, including Pacific Lumber Co., RJR Nabisco Inc.,
Union Carbide Corp. and Wickes Cos.
                                                                                                       

   DEFENDANTS:
   Defendants include Drexel, Boesky, Milken and many others.
                                                                                                       

   AMOUNT: Unstated
                                                                                                       

   STATUS: Pending in U.S. District Court, Southern District
of New York
</TEXT>
</DOC>

