
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911004-0115
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911004-0115.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Scenes From a  Scandal:
   The Secret World of Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky
   ----
   By James B. Stewart
</HL>
<DATE>
10/02/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<LP>
   {This article is adapted form the book "Den of Thieves" by
James B. Stewart, published this month by Simon &amp; Schuster.
Copyright 1991 by James B. Stewart. All rights reserved.}
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   Ivan Boesky may have been the most feared man on Wall
Street in January 1985, but he jumped during a Friday morning
staff meeting when his secretary interrupted to say, "Mike's
on the phone." Everyone in the room knew that "Mike" was
Michael Milken, the junk-bond impresario at Drexel Burnham
Lambert Inc.'s Beverly Hills office. He was the only person
who always got through to Boesky. Mr. Boesky put his fingers
to his lips and looked around the table, ordering silence.
Then he picked up the phone. There were no pleasantries. Mr.
Boesky himself said little, mostly indicating agreement with
whatever Mr. Milken was saying. When he hung up, his eyes
were gleaming with excitement. "We're putting all engines on
max," Mr. Boesky exclaimed to his assembled traders.
   He ordered his staff to buy as much stock of Diamond
Shamrock as possible, while selling short Occidental
Petroleum, betting that Diamond Shamrock would rise in price
and Occidental would fall. The Boesky staff was baffled.
Neither stock had been on their research or trading lists
that morning. What had Mr. Milken told Mr. Boesky?
   In fact, the night before, Drexel Burnham Lambert's West
Coast office had been told confidentially that Occidental
Petroleum Corp. and Diamond Shamrock planned to merge in a
stock swap that would probably cause Diamond Shamrock's stock
price to rise and Occidental's to fall. Since Drexel was
being retained by Occidental, Drexel's traders were barred by
law and firm rules from trading in the stock. But that didn't
stop Mr. Milken, a man so powerful that he seemed omniscient.
   Mr. Boesky's staff members weren't the only witnesses to
the phone call. Mr. Milken's top salesman, James Dahl, was
sitting next to Mr. Milken at the trading desk when Mr.
Milken called Mr. Boesky, and listened as Mr. Milken issued
the trading orders and he and Mr. Boesky refined their
strategy to capitalize on the still-secret information.
Unknown to Mr. Milken, this was the conversation overheard on
Mr. Boesky's end by his traders. And, in fact, under a secret
arrangement, Mr. Milken and Mr. Boesky owned the positions
50-50.
   Even now, after pleading guilty to six felonies, Mr.
Milken insists that he never engaged in insider trading. His
spokesmen deny the account reported here, which is based on
numerous interviews, including eyewitnesses, and review of
sworn testimony. As these previously unreported details show,
Diamond Shamrock looks like a brazen example of Mr. Milken's
and Mr. Boesky's joint insider trading.
   But the scheme proved star-crossed. The following Monday,
Diamond Shamrock's board unexpectedly rejected the deal. Told
of the development, Mr. Milken grabbed the phone, called Mr.
Boesky and, as Mr. Dahl again listened, practically screamed:
"The deal didn't go through. We've got to get out of the
position."
   In New York, Mr. Boesky was apoplectic, frantically
ordering his head trader to unload the positions before the
news became public. But it was too late; the ticker soon
carried the news of the scotched deal, and every arbitrager
was trying to dump Diamond Shamrock. Over the next day Mr.
Boesky's traders struggled to contain the loss. Mr. Milken
screamed at Mr. Boesky for taking too long to get out of the
positions. Mr. Boesky screamed at Mr. Milken for getting them
into the mess. When it was all over, Mr. Milken brooded at
his desk. When Mr. Dahl asked what the matter was, Mr. Milken
incautiously explained that he had a position "off-line" with
Mr. Boesky and that the deal's collapse had just cost them
$10 million.
   Even though the conspirators lost money (insider trading
is a crime whether money is made or lost), the trading set
the stage for Wall Street's most sweeping criminal conspiracy
since the passage of the securities laws -- in which crimes
of far greater reach than insider trading would become
routine.
   What follows are major, newly revealed episodes from
history's biggest insider trading scandal. Because most of
the major players, including Mr. Milken and Mr. Boesky, ended
up striking deals with the government that allowed them to
plead guilty to relatively technical and minor-sounding
crimes, the true scope of their misdeeds has never been
publicly documented.
   Mr. Milken's crimes alone were massive: systematically
robbing clients by trading on their confidential information
for his own gain, manipulating securities prices to force
deals on which he could make huge fees, gouging unsuspecting
clients on junk-bond trades, and in at least two cases,
taking for himself, his relatives and a few Drexel colleagues
securities meant for his customers.
   This story also shows, for the first time, how the
government brought the criminals to justice. One government
agent posed as a blackmailer in order to trick a key member
of the insider-trading ring to confess his crimes. It shows
how Mr. Milken's lawyers and public relations advisers tried
to manipulate potential witnesses and the press, and it
reveals that Mr. Milken actually tried to plead guilty a year
before he finally did so. But his plea was rejected by
prosecutors because it came less than an hour after the
deadline they had set.
                                                                                                       


                                                                                                       

   As their power grew and the volume of their deals
skyrocketed, Mr. Milken's band of traders and salesmen
headquartered in Beverly Hills took on a superhuman aura -- a
tight-knit group working 16-hour days under extreme pressure
and loving every minute of it.
   In fact, the ruthless quest for profits set by Mr. Milken
in Beverly Hills was debilitating. Head trader Warren Trepp
began smoking four packs of cigarettes a day. Bruce Newberg
started taking blood pressure medicine. One day Mr. Newberg
raved hysterically when his phone line went dead during an
important client call. It turned out Mr. Newberg had chewed
through the cord. Another employee, Gary Winnick, complained
he was developing a brain tumor and other serious ailments,
though he remained healthy. Cary Maultasch developed
psychological problems, began seeing a psychiatrist, and
asked to be transferred to Drexel's New York office.
   Mr. Milken set the tone, badgering traders for not
squeezing the most out of a trade, hectoring employees who
tried to leave after only 12 hours of work. When Mr. Dahl
told Mr. Milken he was leaving early one day after learning
his mother had cancer, Mr. Milken's only response was, "When
are you going to be back?" Even when Mr. Milken himself
briefly keeled over at his desk on the trading floor in 1981,
his brother and co-worker Lowell came over, viewed the
unconscious body, and simply returned to his office. The
message was clear: Keep working.
   As early as 1982, Mr. Milken was making $45 million a
year, but his aides were struck by how obsessed he was with
enhancing his wealth and power. Chatting with Mr. Winnick one
day, Mr. Milken looked at the view across Century City and
West Los Angeles to the coast and asked, "What do you think
it'd cost to buy every building from here to the ocean?"
   Once Mr. Milken discovered how his vast network of
junk-bond buyers could be harnessed to hostile takeovers, he
told his colleague Mr. Trepp in a tone of grim determination
that "We're going to tee up GM, Ford and IBM, and make them
cringe."
                                                                                                       

                    THE JUNIOR PARTNER
                                                                                                       

   Mr. Boesky was the ideal partner in crime. For despite his
fearsome reputation, he had neither Mr. Milken's market
acumen nor his access to funds. Like so many of the clients
that accepted Mr. Milken's millions, Mr. Boesky became
dependent. Drexel was supplying most of his financing -- and
charging him a whopping 17% interest.
   Mr. Boesky exhibited his own eccentricities, especially
when the subject was food. When he met stock trader John
Mulheren for the first time at a dinner party at Manhattan's
elegant Cafe des Artistes, Mr. Boesky was asked for his
order. "I'll have every entree," Mr. Boesky said. The
waiter's pen stopped in midair. Mr. Boesky repeated, "I'll
have every entree." When the food arrived, the waiter had to
wheel a table next to them. On it were that day's eight
featured entrees. Mr. Boesky circled the table, looked them
over closely, and took one bite of each. He selected one, and
sent the rest back.
   Mr. Boesky ran his office with an intensity similar to Mr.
Milken's. When Mr. Boesky took a rare day off, he harassed
his employees with calls to ensure that everyone else was
still there working. He had remote control television
installed in the office so he could watch each employee from
his own control panel. Mr. Boesky's head of research, Lance
Lessman, once complained to Mr. Boesky's son, Billy, that
"Your dad's really been beating up on me." "Seriously
understand my father," Billy said in a somber tone. "He is
stark raving mad."
   When Mr. Milken enlisted Mr. Boesky in his schemes, Mr.
Boesky was predisposed toward crime. He was already trading
illegally on secret information from one of Wall Street's
brightest young stars, Martin Siegel. The Kidder Peabody
investment banker seemed to have it all: a beautiful wife, a
spectacular Connecticut oceanfront estate, glowing press. But
Mr. Siegel came to feel he couldn't live on his earnings of
more than half a million dollars a year. The Connecticut
house had cost $750,000. His wife needed full-time help with
their baby. Their Manhattan apartment was too small, and what
they considered an appropriate one would cost another $1
million. He was haunted, irrationally, by the bankruptcy of
his father.
   So Mr. Siegel convinced himself that he needed to provide
Mr. Boesky with inside information. The payoff would be cash
delivered by an Iranian courier who, Mr. Siegel came to
learn, always seemed to skim something off the top.
Otherwise, the payoffs went smoothly. On two occasions Mr.
Siegel met the courier in the lobby of the Plaza Hotel. After
the courier gave the Boesky-dictated password -- "red light"
-- and Mr. Siegel responded, "green light," the briefcase
containing the cash, neatly tied in Caesars Palace casino
ribbons, was handed over.
   But in 1985, Mr. Boesky decided he didn't want to risk
another handoff in the Plaza lobby. He told Mr. Siegel to be
at a phone booth on 55th and First Ave. precisely at 9 a.m.
Mr. Siegel would pick up the receiver and pretend to be
making a call. While he was on the phone, the courier would
stand behind him as though he were waiting to make a call. He
would place a briefcase by Mr. Siegel's left leg, then
disappear.
   Mr. Siegel arrived at the pay phone early on the appointed
date. To kill time, he sat down at a table in the window of a
coffee shop across the street. As he sipped his coffee, he
spotted someone who had to be the courier: a swarthy man
wearing a black peacoat.
   Then Mr. Siegel saw someone else. About a half-block up
the street, he spotted another dark-skinned man keeping an
eye on the man Mr. Siegel suspected was the courier. Mr.
Siegel started to panic. What was going on? Suddenly all of
Mr. Siegel's fears about Mr. Boesky's reputed ties to the
C.I.A. came to the fore. "They're going to kill me," Mr.
Siegel thought. He fled.
   Mr. Boesky called him later that day. "How did it go?" he
asked.
   "Nothing went," Mr. Siegel answered. "There was more than
one person there."
   "Of course," said Mr. Boesky. "There always is. I want to
make sure they deliver." Mr. Siegel was amazed that Mr.
Boesky didn't trust his own courier. Mr. Boesky insisted that
Mr. Siegel repeat the exercise at the phone booth. This time
the plan went without a hitch, and Mr. Siegel collected that
year's "bonus" of $350,000.
   But the frightening experience caused Mr. Siegel to pull
away from Mr. Boesky, and eventually to stop giving him
inside information. His attention was increasingly absorbed
by his efforts to use insider trading profits to prop up a
faltering Kidder Peabody. To this end, he launched an even
broader insider trading scheme with Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
partner and chief arbitrager Robert Freeman.
   While Mr. Freeman would later plead guilty to a single
count of insider trading and his defenders would go on to
vigorously assert his innocence and mistreatment by
overzealous prosecutors, Messrs. Freeman and Siegel stole
information from their firms and their clients to trade
illegally on numerous deals. These included; Champion
International's bid for St. Regis paper; Kohlberg, Kravis
Roberts &amp; Co.'s purchase of Beatrice Cos.; and T. Boone
Pickens's raid on Unocal. As Mr. Freeman once cynically joked
to Mr. Siegel: "I've got to hand it to you. You really know
how to trade information."
                                                                                                       

                    MAJOR LEAGUE CRIME
                                                                                                       

   For the Milken/Boesky team, insider trading was a mere way
station toward bigger goals and bigger crimes. They were
willing, for example, to lose money on their insider trading
when a broader goal was sought. In 1984, when Milken client
Stephen Wynn of Golden Nugget Inc. found himself stuck with a
big position in MCA, Mr. Milken simply directed Mr. Boesky to
buy MCA shares until he had driven up the price sufficiently
that Mr. Wynn could sell his stake at a profit. There is no
evidence that Mr. Wynn knew of this illegal arrangement.
   Mr. Boesky lost money selling his own shares, of course.
Mr. Milken now owed Mr. Boesky $10 million. Paying him with
something so simple as a check was out of the question: It
would create a paper trail, and, more important, it would
cost Mr. Milken money. Instead, Mr. Milken would get his own
junk-bond customers to pay.
   He directed Mr. Boesky to buy junk bonds from Milken
clients, sell them back to Drexel at inflated prices,
generating profits for Mr. Boesky. Then Drexel would convince
other clients to buy the bonds at even higher prices. Some of
the clients weren't smart enough to realize what was
happening; others simply owed Mr. Milken for the many favors
he did for them. In less than six months, Mr. Milken repaid
Mr. Boesky more than $10 million. And in doing so, he
generated further trading profits for his own operation.
   The double threat of Milken information and Boesky buying
power may have reached its apogee with the 1985 takeover by
Drexel client Maxxam Group of Pacific Lumber. Pacific Lumber
was gearing up to resist, but then Mr. Boesky started buying
the company's shares on Mr. Milken's orders. Mr. Milken, of
course, was privy to Maxxam's confidential plans, including
the price it would ultimately be willing to pay. As usual,
Mr. Milken shared ownership of Mr. Boesky's positions and
promised to cover any possible losses. Mr. Boesky's SEC
filings, of course, made no mention of Mr. Milken's secret
interest.
   Maxxam raised its offer, and, feeling under pressure from
two raiders, Pacific Lumber capitulated. Mr. Milken's scheme
netted Drexel more than $20 million in fees and generated
over $1 million in insider trading profits on the stock owned
jointly by Messrs. Milken and Boesky. Pacific Lumber under
Maxxam control soon aroused the ire of conservationists by
felling tracts of redwood forest to meet its junk-bond
payments.
   But Mr. Milken's most lucrative ploy may have been his
taking Beatrice Cos. warrants in connection with the
leveraged buy-out of the company by KKR. Mr. Milken had
extracted the warrants (the right to buy Beatrice stock at a
low price) from KKR by arguing that he needed to offer them
to clients as an inducement to buy the Beatrice junk bonds.
Instead, Mr. Milken kept almost all the warrants for Drexel,
lodging the bulk of them in his and his family's
partnerships. The warrants eventually proved to be worth an
estimated $650 million.
   Mr. Milken's Beverly Hills colleagues believed they were
all sharing in the profits generated by the high-yield
department, both in their bonuses and through interests in
investment partnerships set up by Mr. Milken. Mr. Milken
refused, however, to give details of the partnerships. One
day, Gary Winnick called Jim Dahl into his office and said,
"I'm going to show you something that will make you sick."
Mr. Winnick had gotten a master list of the partnerships. It
showed that while most Milken deputies had an account, there
were more than 40 accounts for Mr. Milken, his wife, his
children and other relatives. In total, Mr. Milken had
created more than 500 investment partnerships. One of them,
named Otter Creek, paid out an astounding total of $473.4
million, most of it to Mr. Milken and his family members. And
that was just one of the partnerships.
   But no amount of money, legal or illegal, seemed to be
enough for Mr. Milken. At the end of 1986, Drexel allocated
$700 million in bonus payments to Mr. Milken's high-yield
department. Under his arrangement with Drexel, Mr. Milken was
free to allocate those payments to himself and his
colleagues. Most of his employees thought Mr. Milken was
generous with them. They had no way of knowing that that
year, Mr. Milken kept $550 million -- nearly 80% of the total
-- for himself.
   Even that wasn't enough. The year before, Mr. Milken felt
that Drexel Chief Executive Fred Joseph had cheated him on a
finder's fee. Mr. Milken agreed that another department also
deserved credit, but argued that his personal contact with
the client had locked up the deal. Mr. Joseph disagreed and
refused to give Mr. Milken the money. He thought the matter
was over. But now, a year later, Mr. Milken again complained
about the fee. He called Mr. Joseph repeatedly, arguing
strenuously for hours about this one fee. In a year when he
had just made $550 million (not counting the Beatrice
warrants and other earnings), and when a conservative
estimate of his net worth and that of his family would be $3
billion, Mr. Milken never stopped griping that he had been
cheated. The amount in dispute: $15,000.
                                                                                                       

                      BEFORE THE FALL
                                                                                                       

   As he careened from triumph to triumph, Mr. Milken seemed
to change. He had always eaten lunch on paper plates out
among his colleagues, but by 1986 he was telling caterers to
serve him on china and he often ate alone. He obtained an
expensive new toupee, began wearing French-cuffed shirts,
bought a half-interest in a Gulfstream jet, hired a bodyguard
and began arriving for work in a chauffeured limousine.
   Still, by the standards of clients like Mr. Boesky, Mr.
Milken was an ascetic. In the summer of 1986 Mr. Boesky was
hardly ever in his office. He was often in Europe at his
place on France's Cote d'Azur. Other times he was at his $1.2
million Paris apartment, his London apartment, his condo in
Hawaii, or in his own suite at the Beverly Hills Hotel.
   But even Mr. Boesky outdid himself one Saturday in
September 1986. The Queen Elizabeth II had just left
Manhattan on a celebratory "cruise to nowhere" for the bar
mitzvah of real estate developer Gerald Guterman's son. The
QE II's entire staff of more than 1,000 had been hired. Peter
Duchin and his orchestra were playing. Clowns entertained on
board. Suddenly, guests began craning their necks skyward as
a twin-engine helicopter hovered over the ship and landed on
its helipad. With the blades still turning overhead, an
elegantly clad Mr. Boesky, dressed in black tie, flashed a
smile as he disembarked to laughter and applause.
   The helicopter was owned by Mr. Boesky's friend Mr.
Mulheren, and when the pilot reported to him, Mr. Mulheren
was furious. The next day he got on the phone to Mr. Boesky.
   "Don't ever use my helicopter again for a stunt like
this," Mr. Mulheren said. "Are you out of your mind?
Revolutions are made of this. People get put in gas ovens."
   Mr. Boesky just chuckled. "You've got to admit one thing,
John. When I go, I go first class."
   The next day, Sept. 17, 1986, Mr. Boesky surrendered to
federal authorities and became an undercover agent for the
Department of Justice.
                                                                                                       

                  WHEN A STRANGER CALLED
                                                                                                       

   The call came early one October evening in 1986. Martin
Siegel had left Kidder Peabody for Drexel, and had just
returned from his new office to his Upper East Side
apartment. "Is this Marty Siegel?" a voice on the phone
asked. After identifying himself only as Bill, the caller
asked, "Did you get my letter?"
   "No," Mr. Siegel replied. "I don't know anything about a
letter." He thought he should just hang up, but something
held him. "Why don't you tell me?" Mr. Siegel asked.
   Then the voice dropped its bombshell. "I mean, your
relationship with the Russian."
   Mr. Siegel closed his eyes, only to see an image of Mr.
Boesky -- the Russian. He struggled to sound unconcerned, but
he had to cut this off. "Don't bother me anymore. If you do,
I'll go to the police."
   "I doubt that," Bill replied sarcastically, and Mr. Siegel
hung up.
   He reeled away from his desk. "So this is how it all
ends," he screamed. When his wife rushed in moments later,
she found her husband slumped over the toilet in the
adjoining bathroom, vomiting.
   The next day, on the advice of his lawyer, Lawrence
Pedowitz, Mr. Siegel drove to his Connecticut home where he
found the letter. It said simply, "I know," and asked for
money to keep the writer from turning Mr. Siegel over to the
Internal Revenue Service. The next week, Mr. Siegel got a
curious call from Mr. Boesky anxiously seeking a meeting, and
then an IRS agent stopped by Mr. Siegel's office while he was
out. Mr. Siegel was growing increasingly unnerved.
   So at Mr. Siegel's request, Mr. Pedowitz contacted the
U.S. Attorney's office. Mr. Pedowitz summoned Mr. Siegel to
his office the next morning. "The U.S. Attorney knows all
about the letter," he told Mr. Siegel. "They know all about
you and Boesky." Mr. Siegel put his head in his hands and
began to cry. "I did this," he said.
   He quickly agreed to cooperate with the government, which
wanted him to try to ensnare his former Kidder Peabody
arbitrage colleagues, Richard Wigton and Timothy Tabor.
Investigator Thomas Doonan was assigned to work with Mr.
Siegel in an undercover capacity. The two always met in
person, but one day Mr. Doonan called him on the phone for
the first time. Mr. Doonan's voice, isolated on the phone,
sounded eerily familiar. Suddenly Mr. Siegel felt a chill. He
was transported back to an October night, to his bedroom,
where he had answered the phone.
   "Is this Marty Siegel?" the voice had asked, ruining Mr.
Siegel's life. "Did you get my letter?"
   Mr. Doonan was "Bill."
                                                                                                       

                       THE COVER-UP
                                                                                                       

   Mr. Milken and his traders were winding down a busy week
in Beverly Hills one Friday afternoon in November 1986 when
salesman Terren Peizer shouted, "Oh, my God." The
electrifying news of Ivan Boesky's guilty-plea arrangement
had just crossed the ticker.
   All eyes turned to Mr. Milken. He showed no reaction.
After three or four phone calls, he jumped up and headed for
brother Lowell's office, where he remained for more than an
hour.
   That weekend, Jim Dahl was summoned by Mr. Milken into the
office. Mr. Milken walked silently into the men's room,
turned on the tap water full blast and said, "There haven't
been any subpoenas issued. Whatever you need to do, do it."
   Cary Maultasch, Mr. Milken's representative in Drexel's
New York office, was summoned as well, and booked a flight
immediately for Los Angeles. When he arrived, he was taken to
Mr. Milken. "You don't know anything about the $5.3 million
payment," Mr. Milken said flatly. But Mr. Maultasch did know.
The payment was the money Mr. Boesky had owed Mr. Milken when
they finally decided to settle the books on their illegal
trading arrangement. Mr. Maultasch was dismissed, but Mr.
Milken scheduled another meeting with him for 4 a.m. the next
day.
   When Mr. Maultasch arrived he was escorted into a
conference room where Mr. Milken sat alone, a guard standing
at the door. Mr. Milken spoke in hushed tones and frequently
wrote his questions on a yellow legal pad rather than
speaking. He erased the questions once they were answered.
The questions all concerned the illegal arrangement with Mr.
Boesky, which Mr. Maultasch had helped Mr. Milken track.
   When Mr. Milken wanted to discuss a specific stock, he
used his pen to point at the stock's name on a list, never
mentioning the name aloud. When Mr. Maultasch left the
office, he returned his entry pass to a Drexel security guard
who tore it up. "Don't worry," the guard said. "You weren't
here."
   Later, even after Mr. Milken had received his subpoenas,
Mr. Milken sat down next to Mr. Peizer, the salesman, as Mr.
Peizer was going through his files. "What are you doing?" Mr.
Milken asked. "Complying with a subpoena," Mr. Peizer
responded. Mr. Milken opened his own file drawers. They were
empty. "If you don't have any documents," Mr. Milken said,
"you can't comply."
   Mr. Milken's defense strategy was set at the outset by
lead counsel Edward Bennett Williams, the famed Washington
criminal lawyer: "We have to remain on the inside {of the
tent} pissing out." Potential witnesses had to stay loyal to
Mr. Milken. To bring this about, Mr. Milken's lawyers found
other lawyers to represent potential witnesses whose
cooperation they thought they could count on. Thus, a key
potential witness like Mr. Dahl ended up retaining Mr.
Milken's own firm, Williams &amp; Connolly.
   Even though Drexel was paying Mr. Milken's legal fees, the
Milken defense team, which also included noted New York
lawyer Arthur Liman, decided not to cooperate with Drexel and
its lawyers even while saying publicly that they were working
together. Mr. Williams believed from the start that Drexel
would fold under the pressure of a massive government
investigation. So Drexel's lawyers weren't allowed to
interrogate Mr. Milken, even though Drexel's chief executive,
Mr. Joseph, sent them out to California to get to the bottom
of the Boesky allegations. Most companies would fire so
uncooperative an employee, but Drexel did nothing. Thus, when
Drexel kept insisting publicly that it could find no evidence
of wrongdoing, it was hopelessly ill-informed.
   Mr. Liman suggested that the Milken camp also retain
public relations expert Linda Robinson, wife of American
Express Co. Chairman James D. Robinson III, who had achieved
prominence herself with numerous high-profile clients like
RJR Nabisco Chairman Ross Johnson. Her colleague, Ken Lerer,
and some associates soon sat down with Mr. Milken to ask the
financier what he considered his principal achievements. The
PR-staffers would then build their campaign around them. Mr.
Milken took a legal pad and red flair pen and began to write,
citing his achievements: that he won a dance contest in
elementary school and was prom king in high school. He
stopped without mentioning Drexel. Some of the participants
rolled their eyes at the realization that portraying Mr.
Milken as a national treasure would indeed be a tough
assignment.
   Mr. Lerer soon began placing pro-Milken tips with favored
journalists, "breast feeding" them, as he once called it. The
Robinson firm began writing pro-Milken op-ed pieces that were
then signed by Milken clients. The whole effort was
enormously lucrative for the Robinson firm, which demanded a
$150,000-a-month retainer and often exceeded it in actual
billings. The possibility that Mr. Milken might be guilty
wasn't even allowed to be discussed inside the Robinson firm.
One afternoon, employee David Gilman, who worked on the
Milken account, was conferring with Mr. Lerer when Mrs.
Robinson marched into Lerer's office and sprang what staffers
came to call the "loyalty test."
   "Is Milken innocent or guilty?" she demanded.
   "Innocent, of course," Mr. Gilman replied. Mrs. Robinson
didn't look satisfied, so he repeated, "He is innocent," with
more conviction.
   "Right," Mrs. Robinson answered, then stalked out of the
room.
                                                                                                       

                    THE TENT BLOWS OPEN
                                                                                                       

   Two big breaks for the prosecutors helped topple the
strenuous defense efforts of Mr. Milken's handlers.
Prosecutors working on the Robert Freeman case had gathered
records of a New Jersey firm called Princeton-Newport that
had done business with Mr. Freeman and Goldman Sachs. They
found some suspicious trading by one employee, whom they then
learned had been fired. The former employee, Will Hale, was
subpoenaed and questioned. The interrogation was getting
nowhere. Mr. Hale was evasive and reluctant. Then prosecutors
asked what seemed an innocuous question: Why did he leave
Princeton-Newport? Mr. Hale hesitated only slightly before
answering, "I didn't leave. I was fired." Why? he was asked.
"I couldn't stand all the crimes they were committing."
   Mr. Hale detailed a series of securities crimes and said
Princeton-Newport's principal conspirator was none other than
the Beverly Hills office of Drexel Burnham Lambert.
Prosecutors went on to seize audio phone tapes that
implicated several Drexel employees, including Milken aide
Cary Maultasch, who, learning he was under suspicion, soon
dismissed his attorney out of fear that he was "in Milken's
pocket." Mr. Maultasch began negotiations with the U.S.
Attorney's office and became a cooperating witness.
   Another major break came soon after Milken aide Jim Dahl
was notified he was about to be indicted. All along, Mr. Dahl
had known he had something to hide. At Mr. Milken's
direction, he had helped client Columbia Savings &amp; Loan evade
taxes through phony trades. Now Mr. Dahl began to question
the loyalty of his lawyer, Robert Litt, whose firm also
represented Mr. Milken. Mr. Dahl requested a new lawyer, but
when he came to believe that Mr. Litt was stalling, he hired
two new lawyers of his own.
   When Mr. Dahl's new defense team examined the evidence
against him, Mr. Dahl was relieved: The suspicious trades
being examined by the government had his initials on the
order tickets, but he hadn't done them. One of the trading
tickets actually had the initials M.M. at the bottom. He
recognized the orders as trades in stocks for Ivan Boesky.
Mr. Dahl only handled bonds, and knew that Mr. Milken himself
handled Mr. Boesky's trades.
   Mr. Dahl immediately went to his old lawyer, Mr. Litt,
still working for Mr. Milken, and told him "I didn't do the
trades, Mike did." Would Mr. Milken sign an affidavit that
Mr. Dahl didn't do the trades? A week later the answer came:
Mr. Milken wouldn't sign or acknowledge anything. Mr. Dahl's
own trading assistant, still on Mr. Milken's payroll, said
she suffered a memory lapse; she didn't remember anything
about the trades, so she couldn't back up Mr. Dahl. Soon, Mr.
Dahl was convinced that he was becoming a fall guy for Mr.
Milken. His lawyers approached the U.S. Attorney's office and
asked for immunity. The "tent" so carefully erected had blown
open.
   Several other Drexel aides would soon follow Mr. Dahl into
the government camp. Even as his lawyers claimed the
defections didn't matter, the news hit Mr. Milken hard. After
testifying before a grand jury, Mr. Dahl was in New York when
he received a call from Mr. Milken. He was in Washington, and
if Mr. Dahl met him there, the two could fly back to Los
Angeles together in Mr. Milken's plane. Mr. Dahl, eager for a
reconciliation with his mentor, accepted. But as the flight
started, Mr. Milken said virtually nothing to Mr. Dahl. He
then selected a movie, "Raiders of the Lost Ark," and turned
up the sound so loud that Mr. Dahl's ears hurt.
   "Mike, if we're not going to talk, will you at least turn
that thing down?" Mr. Dahl asked. But Mr. Milken didn't
respond. He didn't even look at Mr. Dahl, nor did he speak to
him for the duration of the flight. The message sank in. To
Mr. Milken, Mr. Dahl had ceased to exist.
                                                                                                       

                    ADMISSION OF GUILT
                                                                                                       

   By late 1988, having heard the Princeton-Newport tapes and
other evidence, Chief Executive Fred Joseph had ceased to
believe in Mr. Milken's innocence. That meant Drexel was
guilty, too. Mr. Joseph traveled to the office of Mr.
Milken's lead attorney, Arthur Liman (Mr. Williams having
died that summer), to explain his painful decision to have
the firm plead guilty and dismiss Mr. Milken. He was shocked
at the reception he received.
   Mr. Liman compared Mr. Joseph's decision to the Nazi
persecution of Jews. He argued that Mr. Joseph was depriving
Mr. Milken of his rights prior to trial. "That's the first
step towards concentration camps," Mr. Liman said. "No man
can deprive another of his freedoms." Mr. Joseph was too
shocked to counter Mr. Liman's charges, but he insisted his
mind was made up. "Mike did what he did," Mr. Joseph said.
"I'm not here to try Michael Milken." Almost as an
afterthought, he added, "Mike is going to plead guilty
anyway."
   This really aroused Mr. Liman's indignation. "Never," he
said firmly, showing Mr. Joseph to the door. "Absolutely
not."
   Mr. Joseph's next stop was Milken partisan Donald Engel,
the man behind Drexel's infamous Predator's Balls.
Immediately after Mr. Joseph left his office, Mr. Liman
placed a call to Mr. Engel. "Donny, he's selling him out,"
Mr. Liman reported. So Mr. Engel was ready for a fight when
Mr. Joseph arrived at his apartment.
   Mr. Milken is "our brother," Mr. Engel insisted. "You've
got to fight. A mafia lawyer wouldn't act like this."
   "We're not a mafia company," a weary Mr. Joseph replied.
                                                                                                       

                         THE FALL
                                                                                                       

   Despite the Milken team's repeated denials, plea
bargaining was soon under way. By March of 1989, prosecutors
had put an offer on the table for Mr. Milken: plead guilty to
just two felonies in return for immunity for his brother
Lowell. Their deadline for a response was 3 p.m., March 29.
That afternoon, prosecutors gathered in their office to await
the call from Mr. Milken's forces. The grand jury was waiting
nearby in the courthouse. Expecting their client to plead
guilty, Williams &amp; Connolly's Mr. Litt had planned a trip to
Disney World and Mr. Liman was planning to go to France that
very day. But as the day wore on, Mr. Milken hadn't decided.
He wasn't even taking calls from his own lawyers. Finally,
Mr. Litt got through to Mr. Milken. "I can't decide," Mr.
Milken said. "I've got these concerns. . . ."
   The deadline passed without a response from Mr. Milken.
Still, the government waited. A press conference to announce
the indictment was scheduled for 4 p.m., then canceled.
Finally, a breathless Mr. Liman reached acting U.S. Attorney
Benito Romano from a pay phone at New York's Kennedy
International Airport and said, "He's ready to reach an
agreement."
   "I'm sorry," Mr. Romano responded after a brief pause.
"It's too late."
   Mr. Milken had made his worst trade ever. He was indicted
that day on 98 counts. He later pleaded innocent and asserted
publicly for a year that he would be acquitted. But
prosecutors had the advantage all along of knowing what the
public didn't -- that Mr. Milken had already admitted guilt.
   Mr. Milken's guilty plea, this time to six felonies, came
a full year later. On Nov. 21, 1990, federal district court
Judge Kimba Wood sentenced Mr. Milken to 10 years in prison
-- two years each on five of the six counts, with the
sentences to run consecutively.
   Many in the courtroom gasped as the sentence was read, but
Mr. Milken showed no reaction. When the Milken entourage had
gathered in the corridor outside, the heavy door to the
courtroom was closed. Mr. Milken had still said nothing. Then
he turned to Mr. Liman. "How much did I get?" he asked, as if
he hadn't heard Judge Wood. "Two years?"
   There was a moment of stunned silence. Apparently Mr.
Milken thought he was being sentenced to concurrent rather
than consecutive sentences. Mr. Liman broke the news. "Ten
years, Michael," he said gently. "The sentence is 10 years."
   The blood drained from Mr. Milken's face. He took his wife
Lori's arm and the two disappeared into a small witness's
waiting room off the corridor, closing the door behind them.
   Moments later, first Lori, then Mr. Milken, emitted
bloodcurdling screams. Milken lawyer Richard Sandler burst
into the room as Mr. Milken collapsed into a chair,
hyperventilating. "Oxygen]" someone yelled, as a federal
marshal raced for help.
   ---
                    Chronology of Events
                                                                                                       

   May 1986         The Securities and Exchange Commission
                    and federal prosecutors accuse Dennis
                    Levine of making $12.6 million in
                    insider-trading profits.
                                                                                                       

   Nov. 1986        Ivan F. Boesky agrees to pay a $100
                    million penalty to settle SEC charges
                    of insider trading. Prosecutors reveal
                    he has been cooperating in an undercover
                    investigation. Drexel Burnham Lambert
                    and Michael Milken receive subpoenas.
                                                                                                       

   Feb. 1987        Robert Freeman, Richard Wigton and
                    Timothy Tabor are arrested on insider
                    trading charges. Martin Siegel admits
                    insider trading and is identified as
                    cooperating in the government's
                    investigation.
                                                                                                       

   May 1987         The indictments of Freeman, Wigton, and
                    Tabor are dismissed. Prosecutors vow
                    to seek a new indictment.
                                                                                                       

   Oct. 1987        The stock market crashes.
                                                                                                       

   Dec. 1987        Boesky is sentenced to three years in
                    prison.
                                                                                                       

   Sept. 1988       The SEC accuses Drexel, Milken and
                    others of insider trading, stock
                    manipulation, fraud and other violations
                    of federal securities laws.
                                                                                                       

   Dec. 1988        Drexel agrees to plead guilty to six
                    felonies, settle SEC charges, and pay
                    a record $650 million.
                                                                                                       

   March 1989       Milken and his brother Lowell are
                    indicted on 98 counts of racketeering
                    and securities fraud.
                                                                                                       

   Aug. 1989        Freeman pleads guilty to one count of
                    insider trading. The investigation of

                                                                                                       

   Oct. 1989        The junk-bond market collapses.
                                                                                                       

   Feb. 1990        Drexel files for bankruptcy-court
                    protection.
                                                                                                       

   April 1990       Milken agrees to plead guilty to six
                    felonies and to pay $600 million.
                                                                                                       

   June 1990        Siegel is sentenced to two months in
                    prison.
                                                                                                       

   July 1990        John Mulheren is convicted after trial;
                    the conviction is later reversed.
                                                                                                       

   Nov. 1990        Milken is sentenced to 10 years in
                    prison.
   ---
                     Cast of Characters
                                                                                                       

   Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., Beverly Hills
                                                                                                       

   -- Michael Milken, head of high-yield securities
   -- Lowell Milken, Michael's brother, a lawyer
   -- Richard Sandler, lawyer
   -- James Dahl, salesman
   -- Gary Winnick, salesman
   -- Warren Trepp, head trader
   -- Cary Maultasch, trader
   -- Bruce Newberg, trader
                                                                                                       

   Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., New York
                                                                                                       

   -- Fred Joseph, chief executive
   -- Donald Engel, consultant
   -- Dennis Levine, investment banker
                                                                                                       

   Ivan F. Boesky Corp., New York
                                                                                                       

   -- Ivan Boesky, arbitrager
   -- Lance Lessman, head of research
                                                                                                       

   Kidder Peabody &amp; Co., New York
                                                                                                       

   -- Martin Siegel, investment banker (later at Drexel)
   -- Richard Wigton, head of arbitrage
   -- Timothy Tabor, arbitrager
                                                                                                       

   Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., New York
                                                                                                       

   -- Robert Freeman, head of arbitrage
                                                                                                       

   Jamie Securities, New York
                                                                                                       

   -- John Mulheren, principal
                                                                                                       

   Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz, New York (counsel for
Siegel)
                                                                                                       

   -- Lawrence Pedowitz, partner
                                                                                                       

   Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, New York
(counsel for Michael Milken)
                                                                                                       

   -- Arthur Liman, partner
                                                                                                       

   Williams &amp; Connolly, Washington, D.C. (counsel for Michael
Milken)
                                                                                                       

   -- Edward Bennett Williams, partner
   -- Robert Litt, partner
                                                                                                       

   Robinson, Lake, Lerer &amp; Montgomery, New York (public
relations counsel for Michael Milken)
                                                                                                       

   -- Linda Robinson
   -- Kenneth Lerer
   ---
                 Irreconcilable Differences
                                                                                                       

   Everyone named in this article was interviewed or was
asked for an interview and given an opportunity to comment.
To a surprising degree, differences that emerged in various
accounts were reconciled during further interviews.
   The one major exception occurs between Mr. Milken's
assertions of fact, and Mr. Boesky's. The reporting found
that Mr. Boesky's version was consistently more accurate.
After making his plea agreement, Mr. Boesky's only obligation
was to tell the truth; indeed, his plea bargain would be
revoked if he lied.
   In contrast -- and in striking departure from usual
Justice Department practice -- Mr. Milken's plea bargain
isn't revocable even if he now lies. He didn't testify under
oath, even at his presentencing hearing when given the
opportunity to do so, and during the investigation he
repeatedly invoked the Fifth Amendment.
   Nonetheless, the following is an effort to convey Mr.
Milken's position, largely set forth in court filings
responding to government charges, as well as the positions of
others who dispute aspects of this story.
   Diamond Shamrock: Mr. Milken has repeatedly denied
engaging in insider trading. He has insisted that he
committed no crimes other than the six to which he pleaded
guilty. When given the opportunity to respond to allegations
of insider trading in Diamond Shamrock and other stocks, his
lawyers said only that if Mr. Milken had been routinely
insider trading with Mr. Boesky, Mr. Boesky wouldn't have
needed to trade illegally with Dennis Levine.
   Mr. Milken's Fainting Spell: Lowell Milken's attorney says
his client attended to his brother and called an ambulance
for him.
   The Siegel/Freeman scheme: Mr. Freeman has denied engaging
in any criminal activity other than the one instance of
insider trading with Mr. Siegel to which he pleaded guilty.
Mr. Freeman has apparently denied other specific alleged
instances in a presentencing memorandum, but at his request,
this document has been sealed. The Wall Street Journal has
filed suit to obtain the report; the litigation is pending.
   MCA/Golden Nugget: This was the subject of Count Three of
Mr. Milken's plea agreement. But while admitting crime, Mr.
Milken has insisted that the subsequent purchasers of MCA
stock were victims only of Mr. Boesky's rush to sell, not of
their mutual scheme.
   Pacific Lumber: In response to these allegations, Mr.
Milken's lawers said, "It is obviously impossible for us to
refute . . . each and every transaction which Boesky now
claims was tainted with illegality."
   Liman/Joseph discussions: While acknowledging having a
wide-ranging philosophical discussion, Mr. Liman has denied
comparing Mr. Joseph to the Nazis.
   -- James B. Stewart
</TEXT>
</DOC>

