
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911126-0106
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911126-0106.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Democrats, Outsiders on the Campaign Trail,
   Turn to Beltway Insiders for Fund-Raising Help
   ----
   By Jill Abramson
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<CO>
   TAXES
</CO>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
</IN>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
TAXES (TAX)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- The Democratic presidential candidates are
busy elbowing each other to claim the mantle of "outsider."
But when it comes to raising money, they make a beeline for
the ultimate inside -- the Beltway insiders -- Washington's
hive of lobbyists and lawyers.
   On the stump, Sen. Tom Harkin, the prairie populist,
emphasizes his Iowa roots and "wrong side of the tracks"
background. But back in Washington, his campaign is
prospecting for money on K Street, the city's affluent center
of lobbying and law.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Just last week, he was feted at the Spy Club, a chic
Washington watering hole. Among those who helped round up
contributors for the $250-a-head fund-raising event were
Terence McAuliffe, Gerald Cassidy and Patrick Griffin, three
veteran Democrats who also head prominent Washington lobbying
firms.
   Mr. McAuliffe says the crowd at the Spy Club soiree, which
brought in more than $150,000, was young and wasn't dominated
by "the Democratic old-guard." But lobbyists were in heavy
attendance at two $1,000-a-person Washington fund-raisers the
Harkin campaign staged earlier in the political season.
   Lorraine Voles, Mr. Harkin's campaign spokeswoman,
emphasizes that the bulk of the $1 million that he has raised
has come from small, direct-mail donations or from grassroots
fund-raising events, not from Washington operatives or
political action committees. But the campaign certainly
hasn't spurned financial support from the Washington
establishment. "If you want to be competitive, you have to
raise the money," Ms. Voles says.
   Despite his reputation as a Senate maverick, Mr. Harkin
appears to be the 1990 candidate favored by Washington's
lobbying community, the spawning ground for many of the
Democratic Party's mightiest fund-raisers. Mr. Harkin's wife,
Ruth, is a lawyer-lobbyist at one of the city's most
prominent Democratic law firms, Akin, Gump, Hauer &amp; Feld.
Moreover, Sen. Harkin's important positions on the Senate
Appropriations and Agriculture Committees are
lobbying-intensive. The Washington firms headed by Mr.
Cassidy and Mr. McAuliffe both lobby the appropriations
committees extensively.
   Mr. McAuliffe says his support for Mr. Harkin has nothing
to do with his business activities -- Mr. McAuliffe himself
doesn't lobby -- and grows out of friendship. A spokesman for
Mr. Cassidy says he, too, is supporting Mr. Harkin because he
is an old friend. Both men were big supporters of Mr.
Harkin's Senate bids.
   Sen. Harkin is by no means the only Democrat reaching
inside the Beltway for campaign help. Bill Clinton, the
Arkansas governor who has emphasized his southern,
outside-of-Washington base, has an array of notables serving
on his campaign's executive committee.
   The group includes Anne Wexler, a former Carter White
House aide who heads the Wexler Group, a lobbying powerhouse.
Robert Farmer, a former Democratic Party treasurer who was
chief fund-raiser for Michael Dukakis and was, until
recently, a member of the Cassidy firm, is raising funds for
Mr. Clinton, as is Charles Dolan, another Cassidy lobbyist.
Democratic lawyer David Ifshin, who also advises the
American-Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC), is the
campaign's general counsel. The Clinton campaign raised
$100,000 last month at a cocktail party at the home of Vic
Raiser, a politically connected Washington lawyer and also a
former Democratic Party treasurer.
   Even with anti-Washington voter sentiment running strong,
Ms. Wexler says the demand for seasoned campaign strategists
and fund-raisers is still strong among Democratic
presidential candidates. "There is something to be said for
an institutional memory and experience," Ms. Wexler says. "It
isn't a question of insiders or outsiders."
   Sen. Robert Kerrey of Nebraska has fewer ties to
Washington insiders. However, he has appointed John Quinn, a
Washington lawyer-lobbyist and veteran of other Democratic
presidential efforts, as his campaign's general counsel. Mr.
Quinn, in turn, has brought other Washington lawyers onto the
Kerrey team. The Kerrey campaign will have its own Spy Club
fund-raiser, for a more modest $50 a ticket, early next
month.
   Mr. Quinn, for one, says he is comforted by the absence of
other Washington insiders on the Kerrey bench. "The
inside-the-Beltway political community has the best record of
being wrong," he observes. In 1988, many Democratic lobbyists
flocked to the unsuccessful campaign of Missouri Rep. Richard
Gephardt, a powerful member of the House Ways and Means
Committee and the future House majority leader. Mr.
McAuliffe, in fact, was Mr. Gephardt's chief fund-raiser.
   Despite his relative paucity of connections with the
Washington establishment, Sen. Kerrey does have an in with
another important community: Hollywood, where he is best
known for his relationship with actress Debra Winger. Last
week, Barry Diller, chairman of Fox Inc., a unit of News
Corp., Sydney, Australia, hosted a Kerrey fund-raising event
at his Beverly Hills home. Among the co-hosts of the
$250,000-plus event were Hollywood notables Ted Field, David
Geffen and Sherry Lansing.
   Former Massachusetts Sen. Paul Tsongas, who himself did
some Washington lobbying for his law firm, based in Boston,
has a number of Washington lawyer-lobbyists helping him with
fund-raising. Douglas Wilder, the Virginia governor, is
relying on Robert Blair, another wellknown Washington
lawyer-lobbyist, to help raise money. Even former California
Gov. Jerry Brown, who has made running against special
interests and the Washington establishment the centerpiece of
his campaign, has a few Washington politicos working on his
campaign. But Mr. Brown isn't accepting contributions of more
than $100.
   Some of the Democratic Party's most experienced campaign
veterans are still standing on the sidelines. Richard Moe, a
former top adviser to Walter Mondale and an attorney in the
Washington office of Davis, Polk &amp; Wardwell, says he's taking
a "self-imposed sabbatical" from politics these days. Michael
Berman, another Washington lawyer-lobbyist who was a top aide
to Mr. Mondale, says he has offered advice to several
candidates at their request, but will wait until the
Democratic convention to become immersed in the presidential
campaign. Thomas Donilon, another Washington attorney and
campaign veteran, is also eschewing presidential politics for
the moment.
   The Washington insiders who have already affiliated with
campaigns have their work cut out for them. According to the
most recent Federal Election Commission filings, the
Democratic presidential candidates, as of Sept. 30, had
together raised only $2.3 million. At the same point four
years ago, five Democrats had each raised more than $2
million, with Michael Dukakis topping $8 million.
   Among the factors that have deeply depressed Democratic
fund-rasing so far are the recession, President Bush's strong
standing in the polls for much of 1991, the lateness of many
candidates' entry into the race, and uncertainty about the
intentions of New York Gov. Mario Cuomo. Alone among
Democrats, Mr. Cuomo is thought to have powerful fund-raising
potential, and he would begin the race with a sizable
warchest left over from his New York re-election campaign.
   The one candidate with even fewer money problems is
President Bush. Two events held last month in Dallas and
Houston brought in more than $2 million; a Nov. 12 New York
luncheon raised $2.2 million and a gala last week at a
Washington hotel added more than $1 million.
   The president's early fund-raising advantage could well be
doubly damaging to Democrats. That's because the federal
matching campaign fund, which is financed through a $1
checkoff on federal tax returns, is strapped for cash; the
president could deplete the fund by qualifying for larger
pay-outs early in the primary cycle. Qualifying candidates
will receive their first matching funds in January.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

