
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920121-0006
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920121-0006.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy -- Campaign '92:
   As Training Camps End, Bush and Democrats
   Start the '92 Season With More Errors Than Hits
   ----
   By James M. Perry
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/21/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A22
</SO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<RE>
NEW HAMPSHIRE (NH)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- After watching his brand-new New York Mets
baseball team fumble through their early drills, manager
Casey Stengel shook his head and muttered, "Can't anyone here
play this game?"
   The Wall Street Journal's panel of political experts,
looking over this year's crop of presidential candidates,
reaches the same conclusion. "Everybody is doing everything
wrong," says Republican strategist John Sears. "None of them
knows how to play the game very well."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   President Bush is in deep trouble, the panelists agree,
hotly pursued in New Hampshire by his conservative
challenger, columnist and TV commentator Patrick Buchanan.
The Democratic line-up, composed of second-and-third-tier
candidates, is the weakest in years, they say. Yet, because
the economy is in such distress, the panelists expect a close
and interesting contest, with Mr. Bush stumbling across the
line in first place over the probable Democratic nominee,
Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
   The panelists offer some formulas for judging the year's
political events that begin with the New Hampshire primary on
Feb. 18. "The problem threshold in New Hampshire is 37%,"
says maverick GOP theoretician Kevin Phillips. He means that
when an opponent of an incumbent president gets that much or
more of the New Hampshire vote, the incumbent is forced into
pulling out of the race or goes on to lose the general
election. He points to Harry Truman, Lyndon Johnson, Gerald
Ford and Jimmy Carter. But none of the panelists is prepared
to say that Mr. Bush is necessarily fated to follow in the
footsteps of those victims of the New Hampshire primary.
   Democratic strategist Greg Schneiders figures it this way:
Multiply the rate of economic growth in this year's third
quarter by three to get Mr. Bush's winning -- or losing --
November margin. If the gross national product growth rate is
minus one, he loses by three points. If it's zero, it's a
dead heat. If it's plus one, he wins by three.
   Mr. Bush is off to a terrible start, the panelists agree.
First of all, they say, he shouldn't be offering so many "mea
culpas" about his record in office. "It's crazy," says Mr.
Phillips. Where President Reagan was the Teflon man, to whom
nothing stuck, Mr. Bush "is now the Velcro man. He will
absorb anything that goes wrong."
   It's one thing to acknowledge responsibility "when the
damage is over and the recovery has begun," says Mr.
Schneiders. "But if you do a mea culpa in the middle of an
economic free fall, I think it can turn out to be a
disaster."
   If Ronald Reagan were president today, says Democratic
strategist Alan Baron, he'd be getting less blame for the
collapse of the economy and more residual glory for the
successful prosecution of the war in the Gulf.
   Mr. Bush's two most recent trips -- 12 days in Asia
followed by 12 hours in New Hampshire -- were both
unsuccessful, the panelists agree. "I can't understand him
taking the president of General Motors and the presidents of
all these other companies over there," says Mr. Baron. "That
was silly. It takes away his independence." As for the
campaign trip to New Hampshire, Mr. Baron believes that by
going there the president helped to make the primary a
legitimate race between himself and Mr. Buchanan.
   Mr. Bush, the panelists say, is a better president than he
is a candidate and hasn't helped himself lately by operating
almost exclusively in his high-pitched campaign mode. "I'm
just glad that he's not trying to wage a war right now,
because it would be a disaster," says Mr. Schneiders.
   "The president is in free fall in the polls," says Mr.
Sears, "and because he doesn't have a personal constituency
there's no bottom to it." Mr. Sears says, one way or another,
he had better hit that bottom fast and start clambering back
up to respectability.
   Mr. Buchanan poses a special and very dangerous threat,
the panelists agree. "He seems to understand that he should
tailor himself to be a message carrier," says Mr. Sears.
   "It's a free vote for Republicans in New Hampshire," notes
Mr. Baron. "Those voters know the difference between primary
voting and voting for a president."
   Mr. Schneiders argues that "there's a very scary part of
Pat Buchanan that pops to the surface from time to time. You
don't have to be a crazy liberal to get chills every once in
a while at the things he says." But the panelists all agree
it would be a serious miscalculation if the Bush campaign
attacked Mr. Buchanan for his right-wing views. "If Buchanan
does well," says Mr. Baron, "let the press do it."
   But even if Mr. Bush does well and keeps Mr. Buchanan
below 25% of the vote, Mr. Bush doesn't win a famous victory.
"I mean, beating a columnist]" says Mr. Schneiders.
   The best news for the Republicans, the panelists say, is
that none of the current crop of Democrats seeking the
nomination looks very impressive. "If the Democrats had a
strong first-tier candidate in the race at this point, I
suspect he would have a good chance of winning" in November,
says Mr. Phillips. But at the moment, he says, "I don't think
{the Democrats will} make it this time unless one of these
guys gets a lot better or the economy sinks to another
degree."
   The strongest of the five major Democratic candidates is
Gov. Clinton, the panelists agree. They write off former
California Gov. Jerry Brown and they don't see Sen. Tom
Harkin of Iowa making progress. The alternatives to Mr.
Clinton in New Hampshire likely will be Sen. Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska or, as a kind of temporary holding-action candidate,
former Sen. Paul Tsongas of neighboring Massachusetts.
   "My sense is that Clinton will emerge and run a very
respectable race in which he begins to sort out for the
Democratic Party the divisions that it's in the process of
outgrowing," Mr. Phillips says. But Mr. Clinton, or any other
Democrat, needs to get better and the economy needs to get
worse for Mr. Bush to be placed in really serious jeopardy.
   "If Clinton wins New Hampshire by five or six points, I
think he'll be the nominee," Mr. Sears predicts.
   But the other panelists aren't so sure. Mr. Schneiders
sees a scenario in which Mr. Clinton stumbles one way or
another or comes under criticism in the press and begins
losing a primary here, a primary there. Maybe, says Mr.
Schneiders, a toptier candidate -- possibly Gov. Mario Cuomo
of New York -- jumps into the race and all the dynamics
change. The other panelists are skeptical anything like that
might happen. And yet they agree that this will be a year of
extraordinary volatility.
   In the general election, the panelists say, Mr. Bush might
not be able to win very many points for winning the war in
the Gulf. "Barring a crisis," says Mr. Schneiders, the war,
and foreign policy generally, "won't be major issues."
   But Mr. Phillips thinks that with Saddam Hussein still in
power and with the old Soviet Union breaking into pieces,
"there's still a lot of ways" in which foreign policy could
become an issue. Mr. Sears thinks it's possible the Democrats
could actually take Mr. Bush on over the fact that Saddam
Hussein is still in power. "The man is still there," Mr.
Sears notes. "At a certain point, rather than just beat up on
the economy, the Democrats would be wise testing Bush's
diminished credibility in this area."
   Though the Democrats lack a candidate with foreign-policy
credentials, they can approach the subject obliquely -- by
emphasizing trade, talking about how the U.S. is losing jobs
to foreign competitors and complaining that the U.S. is in
economic decline. "It all feeds together," says Mr. Phillips.
   But there will be only one really big issue: the state of
the economy. They all agree on that.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

