
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910708-0056
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910708-0056.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Reluctant Dragons:
   The Democratic Race
   For 1992 Nomination
   Gets Off to Slow Start
   ---
   Bush's High Ratings, Losses
   In Past Damp Enthusiasm
   Of the Likely Candidates
   ---
   A State Convention Is Ignored
   ----
   By David Shribman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
IOWA (IA)
NEW HAMPSHIRE (NH)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- That silence you hear is the race for the
1992 Democratic presidential nomination.
   Despite faint hints that the contest might soon come
alive, the nomination fight is being shaped by the stillness
that continues to hang over political circles in Iowa, New
Hampshire and other states that provide the early tests in
the presidential race.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   So, at a time when no nationally prominent Democrat is
climbing to the summits of New Hampshire's Presidential Range
or lining up at an Iowa steak fry, it's increasingly clear
that the most important element of the 1992 race may turn out
to be what isn't happening now.
   Storefront headquarters aren't being leased in Des Moines
and Concord. Activists aren't being courted. Phone lists
aren't being compiled. County, city and precinct
organizations aren't being cobbled together. Candidate teas
aren't being held. The details of getting on ballots and
filing delegate slates aren't being mastered.
   The upshot: Voters are in for the shortest presidential
race in a generation. By this time in the 1988 election
cycle, Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri, who eventually won
the Iowa caucuses, had spent 67 days in the state. So far
this year, the dozen likeliest Democratic contenders for
1992, including the only announced candidate, former Sen.
Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts, have together spent less than
half that many days in Iowa.
   The late start is significantly changing the character of
presidential politics. It will lead to a race that may cost
less, be far less intimate, give fewer openings to
little-known candidates and perhaps even depend more on
political message than did other recent presidential
elections.
   "You had better know what you are going to say when you do
run, because you're not going to have the luxury of sorting
things out and experimenting," says Paul Maslin, a Democratic
political strategist. "In the 1992 race, you have one chance
and no room to make mistakes."
   The Gulf War and President Bush's formidable approval
ratings kept Democrats out of the race in the winter and
spring, and some Democrats fear that the late start will make
the uphill task of taking on Mr. Bush even more difficult.
   "The lack of candidates has left the field clear for the
administration to dominate public thought," frets former
Democratic National Chairman John White. "They're not being
challenged the way they would be if we had two or three `A'
players out there. There is a mind-set of inevitability out
there that is going to be very hard to turn around."
   But his dismay over the slow start isn't evident at the
grass-roots level, where many activists, weary from a string
of Democratic disappointments, show little eagerness to rush
into battle.
   "No one is sorry nothing has happened yet," says Jeanne
Shaheen, a New Hampshire Democrat whose early work helped
pave the way for Gary Hart's startling victory in the state's
1984 primary. "The primaries were getting out of hand. There
was a lot of wasted time and effort."
   This time, missed opportunities are outnumbering photo
opportunities.
   When New Hampshire's Democrats were planning the speaking
program for their state convention late last year, they had
to plead with leading figures such as Sen. Sam Nunn of
Georgia, Sen. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and Rep. Gephardt, only
to be shunned by them all. "We simply couldn't find a
headline speaker for an event people would have fought for
last time," says Ned Helms, then the state chairman and now
running for governor.
   State Democrats tried -- and failed -- again a few months
ago when they held their big fund-raiser for the year. New
York Gov. Mario Cuomo has ducked a series of invitations to
appear at Dartmouth. Laura Quinn, press secretary to Sen. Jay
Rockefeller of West Virginia, fielded calls for a week from
reporters in Iowa and New Hampshire who asked which Fourth of
July picnic in their states the senator would attend.
Instead, he stayed home with his family.
   Even political journalists have made themselves scarce.
"The big reporting boys aren't even coming to visit," says
Hugh Winebrenner, a professor of public administration at
Drake University in Des Moines. "They're just calling, and
they're not calling very often."
   And even though it's the summer before the election year,
"candidates are still in the stage where they're talking this
over with their families, a year behind the usual schedule,"
says Elaine Kamarck, who in the past has worked for a
Democratic favorite, former Vice President Walter Mondale,
and for a dark horse, former Arizona Gov. Bruce Babbitt. "No
one has moved to the stage where they are raising money. No
one is putting together a team."
   Last month, however, some potential candidates did make
two important stops on the money trail, first by visiting a
group of Democratic fund-raisers assembled by Maryland
Democratic Chairman Nathan Landow, whose allies raised more
than $1 million for Tennessee Sen. Albert Gore in 1984, and
then by visiting leading Democratic contributors at the
country home of party doyenne Pamela Harriman.
   "There hasn't been any fund raising because there hasn't
been a cause," Mr. Landow says. He estimates that each
candidate needs to raise $6 million by Feb. 17, when the Iowa
caucuses begin the process of selecting delegates to the
national convention in New York. But others believe that far
less money and time will be needed, especially if Iowa Sen.
Tom Harkin jumps in the race, diminishing the importance of
his home state's caucuses.
   It's almost too late anyway. Candidates have spent roughly
one-tenth as many days in Iowa this time as they did last
time, and even if Mr. Harkin stays out of the race, a victory
in the much-scrutinized precinct caucuses is more likely to
resemble a blitzkrieg than trench warfare.
   "If you're not spending money for a ground war in Iowa,
what do you need a lot of money for?" asks Michael McCurry,
who has worked on the presidential campaigns of Sen. John
Glenn and Mr. Babbitt. "You can run a presidential campaign
on the cheap this time. The candidates don't have to pay for
infrastructure. They have to spend mental capital on a
campaign message."
   Nearly all analysts say the presence of one well-financed
candidate such as Mr. Cuomo, who probably could raise money
swiftly, might transform the race. That's especially true if
hugely expensive California, now planning to hold its primary
June 2, approves a proposal to move it to early March, a week
after New Hampshire's.
   At the same time, the late start may make it harder for
little-known figures to launch a presidential campaign, as
Mr. Gephardt did in 48 days of campaigning two years before
1988 even began. "They won't have the time to build an
organization and contact a lot of people face-to-face. That
makes a difference in the early states," says Larry Bartels,
a University of Rochester political scientist.
   Mr. Tsongas, who is on a two-week tour of Iowa, still
hasn't put together even the outlines of an organization that
could muster an impressive turnout on caucus night. The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, who is contemplating a third presidential
race, has always generated interest in Iowa but has never
been able to build much of an organization there. Nor are
other potential candidates selecting precinct captains and
pondering how to lure Democrats to caucuses on a wintry
evening.
   So Iowa's caucuses, for two decades a test of organization
and willpower, may turn out in 1992 to be much like a
primary, where television advertisements are more important.
"You won't see presidential candidates paying $10,000 for a
list of caucus Democrats," says Edward Campbell, a former
Iowa Democratic chairman supporting Sen. Rockefeller. "It's
not going to be that kind of game this time."
   The final contours of the race won't be determined until
some leading figures clarify their plans. Right now, the
speculation centers on Mr. Cuomo, who is still embroiled in
budget debates in Albany, and on others more actively testing
the waters: Mr. Jackson; Sens. Gore, Harkin and Rockefeller;
and Govs. Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Douglas Wilder of
Virginia.
   "All these guys are doing this dance around the pond,
waiting for someone to jump," says Carter Eskew, a political
consultant. "Once one of them does, others will get in."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

