
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911023-0126
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911023-0126.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Democrats, Off and Running in New Hampshire,
   Are Months Behind on Doing Groundwork for '92
   ----
   By David Shribman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/23/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<RE>
NEW HAMPSHIRE (NH)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   CONCORD, N.H. -- The race is on -- and everybody's behind.
   It isn't just that the Democrats who would be president
trail President Bush in the polls. They are also months
behind previous years' candidates in polishing their messages
and preparing themselves for the rigors of America's most
demanding political challenge.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Less than four months before the Feb. 18 New Hampshire
primary, which is likely to be the critical early test of the
nomination struggle, it's clear that even the most advanced
campaigns aren't ready for prime time.
   Campaigning in New Hampshire recently, Sen. Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska wasn't prepared to address questions about the
Seabrook nuclear power plant, the most contentious political
issue in the state and one that sparks particularly strong
passions among Democratic activists. Gov. Bill Clinton of
Arkansas, who has thought about running for president for
years, has been slow to assemble an experienced campaign
team. Sen. Tom Harkin of Iowa is running a strong, thematic
campaign but is prompting even some of his allies to worry
that voters may tire of his superheated rhetoric.
   "The only thing that makes it less daunting," says Frank
Greer, a top adviser to Gov. Clinton, "is that everybody is
starting out even."
   Meanwhile, the candidates face the enormous task of
building campaign structures, assembling ground forces for
the early political states, putting together delegate slates
and doing the tedious telephone and canvassing work that's so
important in places like New Hampshire.
   "People are calling us up to try to help, and in almost
any state -- including up here in New Hampshire -- there's
almost nothing they can do yet," says Sen. Kerrey, whose
campaign organization is as far along as any of the
Democrats.
   Both the Gulf War and President Bush's popularity
postponed the start of the Democratic nomination struggle,
and now that the field is assembled -- though Gov. Mario
Cuomo of New York and the Rev. Jesse Jackson may yet be late
entrants -- the candidates are confronting the vastness of
the task. Former Vice President Walter Mondale, for example,
raised $9 million and spent $10 million in 1983, the year
before the election. Rep. Richard Gephardt spent $5.2 million
before the 1988 election year even began.
   "If you took this to the Harvard School of Business, this
would be the problem: Form a $5 million-to-$7 million
corporation overnight in every state, under the public
scrutiny of four networks, the wire services and every major
daily newspaper in the country," says Mark Gearan, the first
staffer Michael Dukakis dispatched to Iowa. "Your operating
budget? You have to raise it. Your staff? You have to hire
it. Your product? You have to perfect it."
   The result is that these campaigns -- led by candidates
who are totally untested on the national level -- are
scrambling to do several months' work in a matter of weeks.
At the equivalent point in the 1988 election cycle, supporter
lists were being generated and the contenders themselves had
become as familiar a part of the landscape as the mountains
and icy streams that form the backdrop for the primary.
   "There's one important thing: These candidates have to be
here personally," says Steven McAuliffe, co-chairman of Sen.
Joseph Biden's campaign here four years ago. "They have to go
to all the boring coffees with 15 people and they have to
shake a lot of hands. The way you gain credibility here is
doing these thingsor at least doing them enough to give the
impression that you're doing them."
   That's only just begun. This month, Mr. Harkin attended a
rally for striking textile workers in Whitefield, held a
coffee gathering with activists in Berlin and mingled with
activists at a library in Plymouth. Both Mr. Kerrey and
former Sen. Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts popped about the
state, even making trips to Maine, which holds an early
caucus. Gov. Clinton spoke to students in Littleton and to a
downtown reception in Manchester.
   But in these first forays into New Hampshire, the
candidates displayed their inexperience. News stories about
Sen. Kerrey and Gov. Clinton, for example, were driven as
much by question-and-answer sessions with activists as by
speeches and events planned by the campaigns -- with the
result that neither was able to project a distinct message to
voters hungry for information.
   "There's an enormous amount of energy out there," says
Charles Campion, who organized Mr. Mondale's 1984 campaign in
New Hampshire and who is serving as an adviser to Sen.
Kerrey. "There are people who want to get involved, people
who want to come to rallies."
   Now the candidates are rushing to build national and local
structures and are struggling to determine a game plan for
the primary season -- all at once. "They're doing strategy
and tactics at the same time, working out what they're saying
along with deciding where they're competing," says Charles
Baker, who ran Mr. Dukakis's successful campaign effort in
New Hampshire in 1988.
   Here in New Hampshire, the candidates are building what
Democratic Rep. Dick Swett describes as "organizations {that}
are still fairly skeletal."
   Mr. Harkin has attracted many of the most prominent
Democrats, an assembly of old-guard liberals and much of the
current party structure. Mr. Kerrey is deploying an
organization consisting heavily of local activists.
   Mr. Clinton, former chairman of the moderate-leaning
Democratic Leadership Council, established an early presence
when he came here to set up a local chapter of the group and
sparred with Chris Spirou, the state party chairman. Mr.
Tsongas is mounting a classic insurgency campaign, depending
on student labor. Gov. Douglas Wilder of Virginia, who spent
much of the month in the Far East, has had scant exposure in
the state, with leading activists saying that they haven't
had as much as a phone call from the Wilder forces. Former
Gov. Jerry Brown of California is no better established.
   Unlike four years ago, when the candidates were derided as
the "seven dwarfs," the contenders are receiving a warm
welcome here.
   "On the ground there's no `Stature Gap,' and no one cares
that Mario Cuomo's not in the race," says Ned Helms, former
state party chairman. "Mario Cuomo could turn up tomorrow and
he would find no one would race over and say: `Thank goodness
you're here, it's been so lonely without you.'"
   Some party strategists, meanwhile, worry that the late
start may be a handicap for the Democratic contenders, who
won't be able to present as polished an alternative to Mr.
Bush as they otherwise might have.
   "We all know it takes time to get your sea legs as a
national candidate," says John Sasso, a Democratic strategist
who charted Mr. Dukakis's course to the nomination. "This is
a big country, and it takes a lot to know the people and the
culture."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

