
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920106-0150
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920106-0150.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Democratic Candidates and The Issues
   ---
   Growth Formulas:
   Democratic Candidates
   Offer Host of Proposals
   To Spark the Economy
   ---
   From Spending to Tax Cuts,
   Their Ideas Reach a Public
   That's Eager for Solutions
   ---
   Fondness for Easier Money
   ----
   By Alan Murray
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/06/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   TAXES
</CO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
POLITICS (PLT)
TAXES (TAX)
</NS>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>

                                                                                                       

   When it comes to economic policy, the 1992 election
campaign will be a liberation for Democrats.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Over the past decade, the party's presidential nominees
have felt compelled to battle against the giant federal
budget deficits created under President Reagan. It has been a
heavy burden. Both Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis ran
vowing to eliminate Mr. Reagan's red ink. Neither was able to
sell that sour medicine to a public averse to pain.
   This year will be different. Granted, the deficit is
bigger than ever: an estimated $350 billion this fiscal year.
But much has changed since 1988. The prolonged recession has
led to rising public demands for government action. Slow
growth has heightened awareness of the gap between haves and
have-nots. And the collapse of the Soviet empire has created
promises of a pot of gold, perhaps as much as $150 billion a
year, at the end of the defense-cutting rainbow.
   As a result, the Democratic candidates are no longer
paralyzed by the deficit issue. For voters unhappy with
President Bush's passive approach to the economy, the six
main contenders for the Democratic nomination offer a
smorgasbord of proposals. There are tax cuts for the middle
class; tax incentives for investment and savings; tax breaks
for families with children; and spending on health,
education, roads, high-speed transportation, high-tech
telecommunications and much more.
   "They are all much more willing in 1992 to talk about
government responsibility for the economy than either Dukakis
or Mondale," says Jeff Faux, president of the liberal
Economic Policy Institute.
   Focusing the candidates' discussion of economic policy are
three separate questions: How can the government get the
economy out of recession in the near term? How can it restore
American growth and competitiveness in the long term? And how
can it address the concerns of middle-class Americans who
feel squeezed?
   So far, the most popular answer is the middle-class tax
cut; it is embraced, in some form, by four of the six
candidates: Govs. Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Doug Wilder of
Virginia, Sen. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and former Gov. Jerry
Brown of California. But while the candidates talk a lot
about it, they have little that's convincing to say about how
it would help the economy. And despite the obvious voter
appeal of such cuts, two candidates -- Sen. Tom Harkin of
Iowa and former Sen. Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts -- oppose
the idea, from opposite ends of the spectrum.
   Mr. Harkin's solution to both short-term and long-term
economic problems comes from advisers who are unreconstructed
disciples of the late John Maynard Keynes: more government
spending, on everything from education to developing electric
cars. Quoting liberal economist Robert Heilbroner, Mr. Harkin
says: "Without an adequate infrastructure, private industry
cannot live up to its potential." Among the Democratic
candidates, he expresses the least concern about the budget
deficit. Mr. Tsongas, meanwhile, favors "strategic"
government investments in technology and targeted tax cuts
for investment -- including a capital-gains cut.
   In the middle are Messrs. Clinton and Kerrey. Mr. Clinton
has the more clearly articulated economic strategy. To combat
recession now, he would cut middle-class taxes 10%, speed up
highway spending, provide more benefits to the unemployed and
expand Federal Housing Administration loan guarantees. To
address long-term problems, he favors an investment tax
credit, a targeted capital-gains tax cut for investments in
new businesses, and more government spending on civilian
research.
   Mr. Kerrey puts less emphasis on his middle-class tax-cut
proposal, saying it "might provide some stimulus, but its
main purpose would be to return some equity to the tax code."
Instead, his economic message rests on a proposal to overhaul
the health-care system -- the cornerstone of his campaign --
as well as on a plan to streamline government (borrowed from
House Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta of California)
and on increased spending for education, technology and
communications. Mr. Wilder combines his tax-cut proposal with
broad but general calls for government spending reductions.
Mr. Brown offers even fewer specifics on what his policies
would be.
   Here is a guide to the Democratic candidates' views on
economic policy:
                                                                                                       

   Taxes
                                                                                                       

   A tax cut for the middle class has become an important
symbol for many Democrats. "It's a metaphor," says Scott
Lilly, executive director of the congressional Democratic
Study Group. "Democrats have been so preoccupied with the
problems of the underclass that we haven't put as much
emphasis on the middle class as we should have. We need a
signal to show we have gotten the message."
   Mr. Clinton's version calls for a cut of about $350 a year
for middle-class taxpayers. "You can't build consumer
confidence without cash," he says. To address broader issues
of the nation's "loss of economic growth and world economic
leadership," he also supports a grab bag of tax credits for
investment, child care and the working poor; a reduction in
the capital-gains tax to account for inflation; and a
targeted capital-gains tax cut for investments in new
businesses held more than five years.
   Economists question how his middle-class tax cut, which
would raise taxes on upper-income Peter to pay middle-class
Paul, could stimulate the economy. But Mr. Clinton's advisers
argue that the middle class provides the engine of consumer
spending, and say their plan would boost consumer confidence.
   To pay for all these, he'd propose a 3% across-the-board
cut in all government administrative expenses -- a proposal
that's popular among politicians seeking office, but seldom
practical once they get there. And like the other candidates,
he'd seek further cuts in defense spending.
   The other candidate who has put tax cuts at the heart of
his campaign is Mr. Wilder. He calls both for an immediate
$35 billion tax cut and for bringing "a new fiscal discipline
to Washington." But doing both is no easy trick.
   The Virginia governor's claim to legitimacy in the
presidential race is that he closed his state's budget gap
without raising taxes. But his plans for doing the same at
the federal level are more than a little hazy. He calls for a
10% cut in vague "administrative overhead," for an annual
savings of $25 billion, plus $15 billion in cuts in
"low-priority" programs. Just how to get the money out of
overhead, or which programs are low-priority, is unclear.
   Mr. Kerrey's middle-class tax cut, like Mr. Clinton's,
would be paid for by higher taxes on the wealthy. It would
help "middle-income Americans struggling to build their
futures, and restore faith in our economic system," he says.
   Mr. Brown's position is the least clear. He complains that
many people making $30,000 to $40,000 a year are in a 43% tax
bracket, counting Social Security taxes; he favors combining
Social Security and income taxes and then reducing the
overall rate. But for the most part, his economic policy is
just a variation on his basic campaign theme that moneyed
interested have corrupted the political system.
                                                                                                       

   Spending and Investment
                                                                                                       

   A link between Mr. Harkin and Mr. Tsongas is that both
emphasize investment spending, rather than consumer spending,
as the key to economic solutions. But their approaches to
investment could hardly be more different.
   Mr. Tsongas, more than any of the other candidates,
focuses on the slow economic erosion caused by deficits. His
plan is to shore up the private sector, so that private
companies will invest more readily. He would encourage them
through tax incentives and through "strategic" investments in
technology. His plan for "an investment-led recovery," like
Mr. Clinton's, calls for accelerating the spending under the
transportation bill. But instead of cutting the middle
class's taxes, he seeks a temporary investment tax credit.
   For the longer term, Mr. Tsongas, like President Bush,
favors a lower tax rate on capital gains. But he would limit
the tax break to investments in stock, and he would provide a
lower tax rate for long-held investments. He'd also ease
antitrust laws to make joint research projects easier to do.
And he would eliminate quarterly Securities and Exchange
Commission filings, so that companies would be less compelled
to focus on short-term performance.
   Mr. Harkin, rather than cajole the private sector into
investing more, would have the government spend directly --
on roads and bridges, repairing airports, highspeed trains,
faster and higher-flying aircraft, electric cars, automated
highways, high-tech mass transit, renewable energy and
telecommunications. In a speech in October to Mr. Faux's
Economic Policy Institute, which is funded largely by labor
groups, Mr. Harkin used the word "infrastructure" no less
than 15 times.
   The Iowa senator would pay for this government largess by
cutting defense spending. "We can maintain the most powerful,
modern, high-tech military in the world . . . and still cut
our military budget by 50% over the next 10 years," he says.
But it's clear Mr. Harkin has heeded the argument of Mr. Faux
and others who say concerns about the deficit should take a
back seat to raising public investment.
   Many of the spending plans Mr. Harkin envisions on a grand
scale are echoed on a smaller scale in speeches by Mr. Kerrey
and Mr. Clinton. Mr. Kerrey, for instance, advocates a
"billion-dollar educational capital fund" to spark local
innovation. He would create a new agency, modeled after the
Pentagon's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (Darpa),
to fund civilian research enhancing "not our military
security, but our economic and financial security." And he
would commit the federal government to creating a
"state-of-the-art communications system that will move us
from the age of the dial tone to the age of information."
   Mr. Clinton also favors a civilian Darpa, and he calls for
a federal budget that invests more "in the future" -- in
areas like education, children's health, environmental
technology and infrastructure and basic research. At the same
time, he says the government should spend less on "current
consumption." (The government's biggest program that feeds
current consumption is Social Security, but Mr. Clinton
doesn't say he would cut it.)
                                                                                                       

   Monetary Policy
                                                                                                       

   Because monetary policy is made by the Federal Reserve,
which is at least partly independent of President Bush, the
Democratic contenders have spent relatively little time
attacking interest-rate policies. All of them would be
inclined to appoint Fed members who would favor easier credit
than the Fed has pursued under Alan Greenspan. But Mr. Harkin
is the most unequivocal advocate of easier money. "Bush keeps
complaining about the high interest rate," he said this fall,
"yet he's the one who just reappointed Alan Greenspan."
   Mr. Tsongas also calls on the Fed to lower interest rates,
saying that recent cuts "haven't worked since rates are still
too high in relation to inflation."
   Mr. Kerrey has occasionally seemed to pin the primary
blame for the recession on the Fed, calling on it in one
speech to "help bring the economy out of the recession it
created." He also called on banks "to pass those reduced
rates to American investors and consumers," a point Mr.
Clinton focuses on as well.
   Rather than calling on the Fed for further action, Mr.
Clinton says the president should force bank regulators to
ease the credit crunch by encouraging banks to make good
loans at lower rates. And while President Bush has backed off
of his ad-libbed call for lower interest rates on credit
cards, Mr. Clinton continues to advocate the idea.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

