
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920107-0001
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920107-0001.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy
   ---
   Democratic Candidates and The Issues:
   With Bush Strong on Global Issues, Democrats
   Seek to Blur Domestic and Foreign Distinctions
   ----
   By Gerald F. Seib
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/07/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<CO>
   FORGN
</CO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
AEROSPACE (ARO)
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)
NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, IAEA (IAE)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)
NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)
POLITICS (PLT)
UNITED NATIONS (UNN)
</NS>
<GV>
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   {Second of a series}
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   WASHINGTON -- Democrats aren't campaigning on foreign
policy so much as seeking to change the very definition of
the term in 1992.
   In an election in which domestic concerns will dominate
and the incumbent's clear strong suit is national security,
the Democrats running for president are only rarely engaging
President Bush on traditional foreign-policy turf.
   Instead, they are openly striving to blur the distinction
between domestic and foreign policy. Their goal is clear:
They want to portray foreign policy as a tool that in the
post-Cold War era should be used largely to advance
Americans' economic well-being, not simply to protect
America's physical security.
   "There is a series of Democrats, some of them candidates
and some of them leaders in Congress, who are trying to
redefine the concept of what national security is," says
Madeleine Albright, president of the Center for National
Policy, a Democratic research organization.
   The key question is whether even wholesale changes in the
world order will end a decade of public skepticism about
Democrats' ability to handle national-security issues, or the
new doubts about toughness sown by Democrats' broad
opposition to last year's war against Iraq.
   For now, though, Democrats are calculating that the end of
the Cold War gives them at least a chance to change voters'
basic thinking about foreign policy. Thus, Arkansas Gov. Bill
Clinton, who has laid out the most detailed national-security
strategy, proclaims that "foreign and domestic policy are
inseparable in today's world" and that today "national
security is largely economic." He talks of giving more aid to
the former Soviet republics -- but in large part because
doing so "will lead to the creation of lucrative new markets
which mean new American jobs."
   For much the same reason, former Sen. Paul Tsongas
proposes giving government loan guarantees and "seed" support
to help U.S. businesses invest in Eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union.
   Similarly, one of the main early foreign-policy proposals
of Nebraska Sen. Bob Kerrey is the creation of a Multilateral
Trade Organization, a powerful international body that would
strive to open world markets much as the United Nations
strives to keep world peace. And all the Democrats argue
that, because the U.S. no longer needs to enlist Cold War
allies against the Soviets, it is free to be tougher with
Japan over trade and to demand more progress on democracy and
human rights before granting trade privileges to China.
   Above all, Democrats are seeking to portray President Bush
as a leader locked into what Iowa Sen. Thomas Harkin calls a
"Cold War mentality," unable to adjust his thinking or
redirect defense spending fast enough to cope with the
radically different world created by the collapse of the
Soviet Union.
   "This is the first post-Cold War presidential campaign,"
notes Anthony Lake, a professor and analyst at Mount Holyoke
College who coordinates foreign-policy positions for Gov.
Clinton. "It will decide whether there are new fault lines in
the politics of American foreign policy {or} whether we can
achieve something approaching consensus."
   Yet this effort to reframe the debate also is full of
potential pitfalls for the Democratic challengers. Any
campaign discussion of foreign policy will lead inevitably to
a debate over Democrats' broad opposition to the Persian Gulf
War. That conflict still is seen by most Americans as a
success despite its messy aftermath and the survival of
Saddam Hussein.
   Virginia Gov. Douglas Wilder says he generally supported
the decision to go to war, though he says he would have stuck
to economic sanctions longer. And Gov. Clinton has chosen to
tip his hat to Mr. Bush for the decision to fight, declaring
in a recent debate that "we all ought to at least admit that
the president was right to kick Saddam Hussein out of
Kuwait."
   But they are alone in their support for the war. Sen.
Kerrey and Sen. Harkin voted against the resolution giving
Mr. Bush the authority to go to war, and now argue that the
failure of the war to end threats from Saddam Hussein or
produce democratic reforms in Kuwait validate their stands.
And Sen. Tsongas complains that the U.S. bore far too much of
the burden for the fight.
   The Democratic candidates also may be open to charges of
hypocrisy in their attempt to outflank Mr. Bush on loyalty to
Israel. While complaining in general that the president
devotes too much time and resources to foreign policy, the
Democratic candidates also are portraying themselves as more
ardent supporters of giving Israel $10 billion in U.S. loan
guarantees to build housing for emigrating Soviet Jews.
   Mr. Bush last fall forced a four-month delay in
considering the request, which is likely to be debated in
Congress over the next few weeks. He hasn't ever embraced
granting the full $10 billion and may seek to attach
conditions requiring Israel to curb settlements in the
occupied West Bank. Most of the Democrats, in contrast, favor
giving the full aid unconditionally, arguing that the U.S.
would merely be guaranteeing private loans that Israel can be
counted on to repay.
   Some slight differences in detail are starting to emerge,
however. Over the weekend, Gov. Clinton said in an appearance
on NBC-TV's "Meet the Press" that he might favor something
less than the full $10 billion and suggested he could back
some delay. By contrast, Sen. Kerrey has urged immediate
approval of the loan guarantees, and Mr. Tsongas says they
shouldn't be tied to Israel's settlements policy.
   The broader risk for Democrats is that their intense
effort to focus on the home front will open them to charges
that they are closet isolationists who would pull the U.S.
back from playing its full role on the world stage.
   President Bush and his allies already are pushing that
argument, and in fact there's an element of truth to it in
some candidates' proposals. Without providing any specific
plan, Gov. Wilder has argued that the U.S. foreign-aid plan
can be significantly reduced. And Sen. Tsongas has argued
that future crises like the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait should
be handled by a United Nations Security Force in which U.S.
forces would be only a minority of the participants.
   But in general, the isolationist charge doesn't seem
likely to stick. The Democratic candidates generally are
arguing for a different kind of U.S. engagement in the world,
but not an end to the engagement.
   "I don't see them going the route of the new
isolationism," contends Rep. Lee Hamilton, a leader of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee and one of Democrats' leading
voices on foreign policy. "The isolationist theme emerges
from the Republican Party, not the Democratic Party, even
though we have been the party criticizing the president for
his lack of concern for domestic affairs." Buttressing Mr.
Hamilton's point is the fact that the most isolationist voice
in this campaign doesn't belong to a Democrat but to Patrick
Buchanan, the Republican conservative who is challenging
President Bush.
   For the Democrats, says Clinton adviser Samuel Berger, the
end of the Cold War has helped free them from their
"quadrennial debate over the Vietnam War" and opened the way
for new positions on when the U.S. should be engaged abroad.
   Thus, Sen. Kerrey has argued that the U.S. shouldn't rule
out using military force to restore the elected government of
Haiti, which was ousted in a military coup recently. And
former California Gov. Jerry Brown has said he would consider
sending U.S. troops to help end the civil war in Yugoslavia
if the effort were undertaken in cooperation with European
allies.
   Beyond such specifics, the immediate challenge for
Democrats is to show that they have the depth of knowledge to
handle foreign-policy issues as well as an experienced
president. So far, only Mr. Clinton has laid out a broad
strategy, which was contained in a 14-page address on
military and diplomatic policy that he made recently at
Georgetown University.
   In it, he proclaimed that the U.S. can cut defense
spending by a third by 1997, $100 billion deeper than the
current Bush administration plan. He said the Navy should
reduce its aircraft-carrier task forces to 10 from 12 and
said the U.N. should consider creating a rapid-deployment
force to deal with world hot spots.
   He also called for diverting more funds from the defense
budget to help the former Soviet Union dismantle nuclear
weapons than the $500 million recently approved by Congress.
And over the weekend, Gov. Clinton said the U.S. might spend
a "couple of billion dollars" helping stabilize former Soviet
republics -- but in turn would save many billions through
lower defense spending.
   The other candidates also are willing to help the
republics, but they differ in their approaches. Sen. Kerrey
chides Mr. Bush for not being aggressive enough in building
an "era of cooperation" with the republics; he specifically
says the U.S. should lead other industrialized countries in
establishing a fund of hard currency to cushion the process
of making the ruble a convertible currency.
   Sen. Harkin approves extending food credits to the
republics now, but says he would approve further aid only if
the republics agreed to allow the International Atomic Energy
Agency to supervise the removal of any tactical nuclear
weapons. And Gov. Wilder says any aid beyond humanitarian
assistance should be provided only when the U.S. has been
assured that the republics will cut defense spending.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

