
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911018-0140
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911018-0140.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   The Moderate Democrat's Curse
   ----
   By Fred Barnes
</HL>
<DATE>
10/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Democratic Sen. Ernest Hollings of South Carolina was
hardly a dove. He'd opposed both nuclear arms control
treaties, SALT I and SALT II. He defended the war in Vietnam.
He endorsed most Pentagon spending. But when President Reagan
ordered the invasion of Grenada in 1983, Mr. Hollings balked.
Instead he asked his staff what position he should take. Most
urged him to oppose the invasion, and that's what he did. He
denounced Mr. Reagan for indulging in "macho politics."
   This puzzling conduct has a simple explanation: He was a
Democratic presidential candidate at the time. And he did
what moderates invariably do in the heat of a Democratic
presidential race. He neglected his moderate base and wooed
liberal voters. It didn't work. Mr. Hollings failed to
inspire moderate voters in the primaries and caucuses, and he
didn't get many liberal votes either.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The moderate alternative always loses nowadays. Sometimes
the loss is ignominious. Sen. John Glenn of Ohio, the former
astronaut lionized in "The Right Stuff," was billed as the
moderate Democrat with the best shot at winning the 1984
nomination. But, like Mr. Hollings, he concentrated on
pressing liberal buttons (he criticized the Grenada
invasion). He lost badly.
   Despite the disastrous examples of Mr. Glenn and Mr.
Hollings, the moderate alternatives in 1988, Sen. Albert Gore
of Tennessee and former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona, took
roughly the same tack and suffered the same result. Now Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas is positioned as the moderate
alternative for 1992. He faces the temptation to appease the
party's liberal wing. If he does, he'll soon be history.
   What causes moderates to cloak their moderate views when
seeking the Democratic presidential nomination? It's an
important question. Because Democrats, who've lost five of
the last six presidential elections, desperately need a
moderate nominee to challenge the Republican candidate in the
Sun Belt and West, where George Bush, Ronald Reagan and
Richard Nixon amassed their electorate majorities. A liberal
who suddenly becomes a moderate (Walter Mondale, Michael
Dukakis) in the fall isn't credible there. A true moderate
would be. The problem is that moderates panic in the
primaries, hide their identity as moderates, and lose the
nomination. How come?
   They're afraid. The party's liberal elite dominates the
nominating phase, and moderates are wary of crossing them.
The activists who take a keen interest in presidential
politics, sign up for campaign jobs, or show up for candidate
events are mostly liberals. Thus there's not much positive
feedback for moderate positions. Mr. Hollings got little from
his campaign staff. Rep. Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, who
briefly considered a 1992 race, got a cool reception when he
gave a moderate pitch to the Democratic National Committee
last month. An aggressive moderate candidacy would make
liberals furious. Moderates have been unwilling to risk that.
   The nomination process is stacked against the moderate
candidate who sticks to his guns. The important thing is
early momentum, and it comes from collecting endorsements and
money. "It's the institutional left and the institutional
liberal interest groups that give money and endorsements,"
says Mike McCurry, the former spokesman for the Democratic
National Committee. They don't give either to noisy
moderates.
   What's worse for moderates, hordes of moderate voters have
abandoned the Democratic primaries. In 1976, 20% of eligible
voters in Florida participated in the Democratic primary.
Jimmy Carter, the moderate alternative that year, won. In
1988, 13% voted. Mr. Dukakis, the liberal favorite, won. Some
of the missing Democratic voters have become Republicans.
Others have given up on politics. Getting them to vote in
Democratic primaries again is no easy feat. Mr. Glenn tried
to organize disaffected Democrats in the Iowa caucuses in
1984. Not many showed up to vote, but then he didn't give
them much reason to. Mr. Babbitt tried again in 1988 and
fared no better. Now Mr. Clinton is eager to attract them.
   It can be done, but not by a fainthearted moderate who
mimics liberals. To be successful, a moderate must play up
his moderate positions relentlessly and use them as a weapon
against opponents. Liberals may boo, but that will signal
moderate voters there's a kindred spirit in the race. In
California, Senate candidate Dianne Feinstein was booed by
liberal Democrats in 1990 when she endorsed capital
punishment and lauded President Bush's tough posture against
Saddam Hussein. She lost liberal votes, but attracted many
more from moderates. John Anderson got a boost in the 1980
Republican presidential race when he was booed at a forum
sponsored by gun owners.
   A moderate should be thrilled if liberal activists are
angry. That means clear distinctions are being drawn between
the moderate and his or her liberal rivals. Of course the
distinctions have to be ones that appeal to the moderate
Democratic electorate, mostly middle-class whites. Mr. Glenn,
Mr. Hollings and Mr. Babbitt stressed economic austerity. It
wasn't well received. "I haven't seen a market yet for tough
choices," says Stan Greenberg, Mr. Clinton's pollster. Gov.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia is running in 1992 as a fiscal
conservative. That has little resonance with Democratic
voters.
   Four clusters of issues are available to a moderate
alternative who pursues a strategy of differentiation. Mr.
Clinton has touched vaguely on all of them in recent
speeches.
   The Party. Disaffected Democrats are looking for a sign
that "they weren't wrong in rejecting Democrats in four of
the last five presidential elections," says Will Marshall of
the Progressive Policy Institute, a moderate Democratic think
tank. This can be telegraphed by blaming liberal
fundamentalism for scaring away moderate Democrats and losing
elections. Mr. Clinton came close to saying this in May. "Too
many of the people who used to vote for us, the very burdened
middle class we're talking about, have not trusted us in
national elections to defend our national interests abroad,
to put their values into our social policy at home, or to
take their tax money and spend it with discipline," he said.
But he hasn't repeated that lately. He needs to, now that
voters are beginning to listen. Certainly no other Democratic
candidate is likely to zing the party.
   National Security. It's crazy for a moderate Democrat to
yield this issue. There's fertile ground to plow to the right
of President Bush on foreign policy. A moderate Democrat
could criticize him for failing to oust Saddam Hussein, for
cozying up to Mikhail Gorbachev while ignoring democratic
leaders like Boris Yeltsin and delaying recognition of the
Baltics, for recklessly cutting America's nuclear arsenal,
for being soft on Chinese communists. The only Democrat who's
worked this angle is Mr. Wilder. And he backed off after his
comment about killing Saddam stirred controversy. Alone among
announced Democratic candidates, Mr. Clinton backed Desert
Storm. That gives him entree to criticize his opponents as
isolationists for balking at the use of force and, later, to
go after Mr.Bush.
   Race. Democratic candidates either steer clear of this
sensitive issue or say what the civil rights lobby wants to
hear. A Democrat who aggressively questions affirmative
action and quotas will be treated as a pariah by liberals.
But a moderate candidate who ducks the issue won't be taken
seriously by disaffected Democrats. To them, race is
critical. Mr. Clinton's current stance won't win moderates.
He dismisses the quota flap as a cynical attempt by Mr. Bush
to divide white males from the Democratic party. Maybe so,
but middle-class moderates don't see it that way.
   Values. Abortion, pornography and the flag don't matter
much in the Democratic race. Welfare, crime and the
underclass do. Moderate voters are looking for a candidate
who reflects their revulsion. Mr. Marshall says he's been
shocked by "the violence of feelings" against welfare in
focus groups of Democratic voters. In a vague way, Mr.
Clinton is trying to tap this by talking up "personal
responsibility." In announcing his candidacy Oct. 3, he said,
"we should insist that people move off welfare rolls and onto
work rolls." That's a start, but he'll have to flesh it out.
   Should all else fail, there's a surefire way to be noticed
by disenchanted moderates: get in a feud with Jesse Jackson.
This thought has crossed Mr. Clinton's mind. Even if Mr.
Jackson doesn't run, he'll still be on the sidelines
kibbitzing. To white moderates, Mr. Jackson is the symbol of
all that's wrong with the Democratic party. But in 1984 and
1988, Mr. Jackson's foes gave him a free ride. Mr. Babbitt
said everyone should lay off Mr. Jackson because "there has
been so much racism in this society." A moderate alternative
who treats Mr. Jackson like that will lose every time.
   ---
   Mr. Barnes covers the White House for The New Republic.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

