
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911216-0006
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911216-0006.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Six Democratic Contenders, in Televised Debate,
   Assail Bush, Agree on Need to Help Middle Class
   ----
   By James M. Perry and David Shribman
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/16/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<CO>
   TAXES
</CO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)
INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)
POLITICS (PLT)
TAXES (TAX)
TRADE ISSUES (TRD)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
SOVIET UNION (UR)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- The six declared Democratic presidential
candidates agreed on the need to help middle-class Americans
and gingerly attacked one another's positions on several key
issues. But, in their first nationally televised debate, they
pulled out all the stops in attacking President Bush.
   Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin, the unrepentant liberal among the
candidates, compared "an isolated" George Bush, who "doesn't
understand ordinary hard-working Americans," to the imperious
King George III of England "and his government of the
privileged few."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, fresh from an easy victory
in a Florida straw poll, called Mr. Bush another Scrooge.
But, emphasizing his role as the designated moderate in the
lineup, he warned that Democrats can't allow themselves to be
"the ghosts of Christmas past. We need to change, too."
   Despite warnings from NBC News' Tom Brokaw, moderator of
the discursive 90-minute session, not to solicit campaign
contributions, former California Gov. Jerry Brown managed to
read out twice a toll-free number that listeners could call
to make donations to his campaign.
   High drama and memorable one-liners were scarce, but Sen.
Bob Kerrey of Nebraska came as close as anyone when he took
umbrage at Mr. Brown's suggestions that he and other members
of Congress are creatures of special interests and political
action committee money.
   "I resent all this," Mr. Kerrey, a highly decorated
Vietnam veteran, said as he turned to face Mr. Brown. "Are
you saying I'm bought and paid for?" Mr. Brown seemed to back
down. "I'm saying you're part of the system," he responded.
   The other two candidates, former Sen. Paul Tsongas of
Massachusetts and Gov. Doug Wilder of Virginia, tried to stay
above the fray. Mr. Wilder at one point called on everyone to
stop talking and listen once again to Mr. Brokaw's questions.
   Though the possible candidacy of Gov. Mario Cuomo of New
York is on the minds of all these Democrats, no one mentioned
his name once during the debate. Mr. Cuomo, still considering
a candidacy, faces a Friday deadline to file for New
Hampshire's Feb. 18 primary, the first in the nation.
   The debate was staged without an audience, and Mr. Brokaw
asked all the questions. The discussion covered both domestic
and foreign-policy questions, and most of the time no more
than two candidates had an opportunity to answer any
particular question.
   But even in that wide-ranging context, some of the
candidates managed to fashion distinctive appeals.
   Mr. Clinton praised President Bush for waging war against
Iraq's Saddam Hussein. "We ought to admit that the president
was right to kick Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait," he said.
Sen. Kerrey, who managed to note his service in Vietnam on at
least three occasions, took exception. "Governor, I disagree
with you strongly. I'm not prepared to admit that."
   The candidates generally took a hard line against Japan's
trade policies. Sen. Harkin said if he were president, he
would tell the Japanese, "we are going to reduce that trade
deficit {with Japan} to zero."
   On helping people in what used to be the Soviet Union
survive what promises to be a harsh winter, most of the
candidates opted for humanitarian aid. Sen. Harkin took the
toughest line, opposing large sums in foreign aid. "We ought
to go about developing markets over there," he said, "so that
we can start to trade with them in the future."
   On domestic policy, the candidates agreed on the need for
a national health-care program and hit hard on backing
economic policies to help distressed working-class and
middle-class American taxpayers. But they disagreed on ways
to go about it.
   Govs. Clinton and Wilder called for a tax cut for the
middle class to give a short-term boost to the sagging
economy. With the cash, Gov. Clinton said, consumers would
start spending again, helping the economy "in places like New
Hampshire."
   Sen. Harkin opposed such a tax cut. He pulled a dollar
bill out of his pocket and held it before the cameras. All it
would amount to, he said, "is one dollar a day for a family."
His remedy is government-funded public-works projects.
   Earlier yesterday, Gov. Clinton recorded a decisive
victory in the Florida straw poll, a result that his
opponents derided as insignificant and that history shows may
be misleading.
   Meaningful or not, the Clinton win kicked off a surge of
political activity that culminated with last night's debate.
Gov. Clinton garnered 54% of the votes from the activists and
party leaders assembled in Lake Buena Vista across a grassy
meadow from Walt Disney World. Sen. Harkin finished second,
with 31%, while Sen. Kerrey was a distant third, with 10%.
   Such straw votes -- or "beauty contests," in the parlance
of politics -- are extremely unpredictable indicators of
candidate strength. This nonbinding poll provided a catapult
for Jimmy Carter a year before the 1976 election. But a
similar event in Wisconsin a year before the 1984 election
was captured by California Sen. Alan Cranston, whose
performance in New Hampshire was so weak that more of the
state's Democrats voted for Ronald Reagan than for Mr.
Cranston, who vanished from the field soon after.
   Because of the unpredictability, campaign staffs conducted
stealth drives here, denying they were putting much effort
into the balloting but quietly working for a strong turnout.
Mr. Clinton's effort was conducted closest to the delegates'
line of vision. Using the convention as a dry run for the
Florida primary on March 10, Mr. Clinton's staff conducted a
telephone canvass, hand-delivered 1,000 campaign videos to
delegates and mailed 1,300 more to other delegates, an
extraordinary commitment for an event that provides nothing
but a symbolic boost.
   The Clinton staff assigned one whip for every 10
delegates, continually called uncommitted delegates, and
deployed a high-tech crew -- equipped with walkie-talkies,
beepers and earphones -- to distribute hundreds of T-shirts,
hats and signs. Then Sen. Harkin delivered an emotional
speech that centered on the struggles of his deaf brother,
fired during a union struggle from his job in a jet assembly
plant. Immediately, the Clinton forces set out to scotch a
movement of uncommitted delegates, who made up about a third
of the delegates, to the Iowa senator.
   "This caps the first stage of this campaign, showing that
Clinton's the class of the field and proving that he can not
only give a good speech but get votes," said George
Stephanopoulos, the deputy campaign manager.
   At the same time, Alan Greer, Sen. Harkin's Florida state
chairman, said he took comfort from the results, adding:
"This shows that Tom Harkin can run in the South."
   Insignificant or not, the three-day session here provided
ever more reminders that the campaign can't take final shape
until Gov. Cuomo decides whether to run.
   Though not on the ballot, Mr. Cuomo was on the minds of
delegates and candidates alike. In a speech Saturday morning,
Sen. Kerrey made a mischievous aside about "the governor up
north," and no one mistook his reference to mean Gov. Howard
Dean of Vermont or Gov. Robert Casey of Pennsylvania. When
Florida Gov. Lawton Chiles listed the Democratic contenders,
he tantalized the delegates by leaving room for Mr. Cuomo.
And Bradley McElroy, a 10-month-old baby, was paraded around
the convention hall with a "Cuomo for president" sign pinned
to his shirt.
   "I've heard Kerrey, Clinton and Harkin," said delegate
James Clark of Miami, "and I'll wait for Cuomo." But when
Hillsborough County (Tampa) reported that two of its
delegates wrote in Mr. Cuomo's name, the room swelled with
boos.
   For all their exertions, the campaigns' strongest efforts
were their attempt to play down the significance of the straw
poll.
   "I'm a victim of the lessons of 1984 -- that there's
utterly no relation between this and the election," said
William Shore, a senior counselor to Sen. Kerrey. "For us,
the purpose is to take the opportunity to present our
message."
   ---
                        Straw Poll
                                                                                                       

   Balloting in yesterdays' straw poll of delegates to the
Florida Democratic convention.
                                                                                                       

                               # OF VOTES     % OF VOTES
                                                                                                       

       Bill Clinton               950             54
       Tom Harkin                 549             31
       Bob Kerrey                 131             10
       Paul Tsongas                32              2
       Douglas Wilder              24              1
       Mario Cuomo*                21              1
       Jerry Brown                  4              0
                                                                                                       

   *Write-in votes
   Note: Gov. Cuomo, Gov. Wilder and former Gov. Brown didn't
actively seek votes in the balloting
                                                                                                       

                   Campaign Milestones
                                                                                                       

   Tentative schedule of early events in the struggle for the
Democratic presidential nomination.
                                                                                                       

   -- Dec. 19: Democratic candidates' health forum, Nashua,
N.H.
   -- Dec. 20: Filing deadline for New Hampshire primary
   -- Jan. 10: Des Moines Register debate, Des Moines, Iowa
   -- Jan. 19: Democratic state party debate, Manchester
Central High School, Manchester, N.H.
   -- Late January: Nationally televised Democratic debate
from either Washington or New York
   -- Jan. 31: Federal Election Commission financial data due
   -- Feb. 4-5: Democratic dialogues at Dartmouth College,
Hanover, N.H.
   -- Feb. 9: Democratic state party debate, either in
Claremont, N.H. or Henniker, N.H.
   -- Feb. 10: Iowa precint caucuses
   -- Feb. 16: League of Women Voters' debate, St. Anselm's
College, Manchester, N.H.
   -- Feb. 18: New Hampshire primary
</TEXT>
</DOC>

