
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911212-0003
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911212-0003.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   A Brief Flurry of Unseasonal Political Activity
   Marks the End of the Beginning of the '92 Race
   ----
   By David Shribman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<GV>
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- This is the end of the beginning.
   This weekend, the preface to the 1992 presidential
campaign -- so long in starting, so resistant to early
definition -- starts to close. And by the end of the year,
the countours of the race should finally be distinguishable.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Tomorrow, Florida's Democrats gather in the shadow of
Disney World for a weekend convention that includes the only
presidential balloting of 1991 -- a nonbinding straw poll of
convention delegates that has no meaning beyond the symbolic
but which for the past several weeks has become something of
a political battlefield.
   Hours after the balloting is completed on Sunday, the six
announced presidential candidates meet at 6:30 p.m. EST for
an hour-and-a-half debate to be carried live on NBC. By the
end of next week, the lengthy deliberations of New York Gov.
Mario Cuomo should be finished. And at the end of the month,
the first meaningful indications of the resources of the
Democratic contenders will come when the candidates close
their books and prepare for the year-end financial reports
that must be filed with the Federal Election Commission.
   This flurry in the middle of the holiday season might
otherwise be forgotten in an ordinary campaign, which
customarily would have begun sometime last winter, heated up
in the summer and distilled down to a couple of candidates
and issues by Thanksgiving. But the late start -- all but one
of the entrants joined the campaign after Labor Day -- adds
weight to events like the NBC debate.
   The most important development will be the decision of Mr.
Cuomo, which will give final shape to the Democratic race
and, if he decides to run, transform the six current declared
candidates from suitors for voters' allegiance to challengers
of the New York governor.
   A new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, conducted Friday
through Monday among 1,004 registered voters, shows just how
thoroughly Mr. Cuomo dominates the Democratic landscape right
now. Among Democrats and independents, Mr. Cuomo is the
choice of 30%; no other contender has more than 11%.
   At this point in the campaign, year-end events like the
straw poll and debate "give us hints about what is going on,
but just hints," says Thomas Donilon, a Democratic political
strategist who isn't involved in the current presidential
campaign. "This race has only just really begun, and it has
started very, very late. It is very dangerous for these
candidates, because they're going from standing still to full
throttle in a few weeks."
   The greatest impact may be in New Hampshire, which has
returned to its customary position as the most important
early test of the campaign.
   "The major candidates have been up here a lot, and there's
the feeling that things are catching fire," says Steven
McAuliffe, a Concord Democratic lawyer who ran Sen. Joseph
Biden's New Hampshire campaign in the last election cycle.
"It's going be a quick firestorm and then it's going to be
over. After months of waiting, it's finally here."
   From the start, Democratic National Chairman Ronald Brown
has discouraged events like Florida's straw poll of 2,300
delegates, regarding such contests as distractions that
siphon off money from other campaign events only to give an
artificial indication of candidates' strength. In 1983, for
example, Democrats spent hundreds of thousands of dollars to
mobilize activists in Wisconsin in a struggle won by Sen.
Alan Cranston of California. Only months later, Mr. Cranston
finished seventh in the New Hampshire primary and disappeared
from the presidential race.
   "A month after this straw poll, the whole event will be
totally forgotten," says John Sasso, a Democratic political
strategist who mapped Michael Dukakis's route to the 1988
nomination. "This won't tell you much because it isn't a
significant test. The campaigns haven't been down there. It
won't tell you anything about the candidates' potential
appeal."
   That's the line the candidates and their keepers are
publicly peddling themselves. They're all playing down the
event. But they're all quietly making efforts, too.
"Everybody's playing," says George Stephanopoulos, deputy
campaign manager for Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas. Only
former Gov. Jerry Brown of California and Gov. Douglas Wilder
of Virginia aren't competing, although they, too, may have a
presence in Orlando.
   Mr. Clinton's success at party events late last month and
his quiet mobilization for the straw poll is one of the
reasons the stakes have been raised in the inconsequential
Florida convention.
   At the start, Democratic insiders believed that Sen. Tom
Harkin, a fiery populist with strong ties with organized
labor, had a natural advantage in the Florida convention,
where the delegates tend to be activists and labor oriented.
But now Mr. Harkin's forces, troubled about Mr. Clinton's
rise, are trying to cut expectations of their candidate's
performance and are arguing that Florida is a natural part of
Mr. Clinton's Southern base.
   The candidates will get far broader exposure during Sunday
night's debate. Prime-time television appearances have had
important consequences in the early stages of other
campaigns. The poor showing of former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of
Arizona in a 1987 debate, for example, all but doomed his
1988 prospects.
   "It's not the Super Bowl but a scrimmage: We'll know who's
limping and we'll have an idea who is looking sharp," says
Jim Hightower, a former Texas agriculture commissioner and a
shrewd political observer.
   The debate will be the first national exposure for most of
these relatively unknown candidates, who conducted the early
part of their campaigns in a period when President Bush was
regarded as a heavy favorite. Now that the president's
political fortunes have dipped, the Democratic debate is
likely to win a wider audience.
   At the same time, the year-end financial reports, which
close Dec. 31 and must be filed by Jan. 31, will provide an
important indicator of the candidates' standing.
   "Money is the first primary," says Ellen Miller, executive
director of the Center for Responsive Politics, a Washington
research group that examines the influence of money in
politics. "If you have it, you're a viable candidate. If you
don't, you're not."
   This year-end burst of activity is an opportunity for Gov.
Clinton to consolidate his position, potentially making him
either the target of his competitors or the leading
alternative to Mr. Cuomo, who must decide by next Friday to
enter the race if he is to have a line on the New Hampshire
ballot.
   "This is the time Clinton has to really zoom ahead," says
Elaine Kamarck, who directed the delegate-selection effort
for former Vice President Walter Mondale in 1984 and was
deputy campaign manager for Mr. Babbitt in 1988. "He's got to
show well in the Florida straw poll, because he's expected
to. He's got to show the audience in the debate that he's the
broadest, most interesting candidate, and he's got to show at
least a respectable amount of money. We will know a lot about
Clinton very soon."
   While Mr. Harkin has won liberal and labor support, former
Sen. Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts has carved out a niche for
his "pro-business" Democratic appeal, with special strength
in New Hampshire; and Gov. Clinton has won praise for his
economic prescription; Sen. Robert Kerrey of Nebraska still
is struggling for an opening and may find it by Sunday.
   "The kickoff is very important for Kerrey," says Sandy
Maisel, a Colby College political scientist. "He announced as
everybody's hero and he has just floundered. Kerrey's now the
last person out, and this may be his last chance to assert
himself."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

