
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910620-0161
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910620-0161.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Counterpoint:
   U.S. Medical-Care System: Why Not the Worst?
   ----
   By Ted Marmor
</HL>
<DATE>
06/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15
</SO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)
INSURANCE (INS)
</IN>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
</GV>
<RE>
AUSTRALIA (ASA)
CANADA (CN)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
GERMANY (GE)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   Three recent events -- the June 5 introduction of Senate
Democratic leader George Mitchell's plan for universal health
insurance, the surprising May 13 acknowledgement by the
American Medical Association that American medical care
requires very substantial reform, and the General Accounting
Office's striking June 4 endorsement of the Canadian medical
insurance model -- have again put medical-care reform in the
headlines.
   But Congress, the AMA and the federal bureaucracy are only
catching up with public sentiment. A 1990 Harvard University
survey of 10 industrial nations found Americans the least
satisfied with their health care. Eighty-nine percent agreed
it needs either "fundamental changes" or "complete
rebuilding."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Spiraling costs, incomplete coverage and baffling
insurance arrangements head the list of American complaints.
Americans spend 12.2% of their gross national product on
medical care vs. about 9% in Canada and Germany (the next
highest spenders among the seven largest developed
economies).
   Despite these costs, between 30 million and 40 million
Americans have no health insurance at all, and even the
relatively well-insured worry about gaps in their coverage.
And the paper work frustrates everyone. Other countries have
controlled medical inflation by taking advantage of the power
of monopsony. A single purchaser faces providers, directly or
indirectly, across the bargaining table.
   In the U.S., by contrast, consumers must rely on the
sellers of medical services to tell them how much to buy,
while government programs or insurance companies pick up much
of the tab. Inflation is inevitable in such a market.
Unsuccessful efforts to control spending by limiting patient
choice, monitoring physician decisions and increasing cost
sharing have frustrated physicians and patients alike.
   One advantage, perhaps the only one, of being the last
industrial nation to address this topic is that we can learn
from the experience of others. Universal but administratively
decentralized health insurance is workable. Australia allows
its states to administer their universal plans. West Germany
relies on more than 1,200 sickness funds. The Canadian
experience, in particular, shows that decentralization
permits considerable variation.
   Canadian provinces must provide health insurance
(Medicare) that is universal, comprehensive in benefits,
publicly administered and portable across the country. Beyond
these core requirements, there is great variation: in
financing, in whether additional benefits are offered, in
whether there are insurance intermediaries between provincial
governments and medical providers, and so on.
   In the previously mentioned 10-nation survey, Canadians
were the happiest with their health-care system -- 56%
reported overall satisfaction compared with 10% in the U.S.
Before the introduction of national health insurance in
Canada, they spent as much per capita as the U.S. on medical
care. Now they spend about 30% less.
   The West German system shows that it is possible to
mandate universal health insurance through a variety of
individual plans. Every German citizen is insured. Most are
insured by "sickness funds" that employers and unions jointly
run. The unemployed have their own fund; so do retirees and
the disabled.
   Individual plans negotiate collectively with medical-care
providers within the framework of aggregate targets set by
government. Coordination of all this is complex, but in the
10-nation survey, Germans tied the French for third place in
satisfaction.
   Canadian and German doctors, like their American
counterparts, are among their society's most highly paid
professionals. In both countries physicians enjoy greater
autonomy in their work than in the heavily administered U.S.
system. American doctors spend much more time than their
foreign counterparts on payment-related paperwork, and their
treatment decisions are subject to far more intrusive routine
monitoring by insurers.
   Like the U.S., Canada, Australia and West Germany are all
federal states. None are free of problems, but all cope with
tensions among cost, access and quality better than the U.S.
does. All pay their physicians on a fee-for-service basis,
while managing to control total expenditures. None limits
patient choice of providers, as much as the "managed care"
systems advocated by some reformers in the U.S.
   The excuses offered for failing to learn from these
experiences range from the serious to the silly. The claim
that American politics is too corrupt or incompetent to
manage a national health-insurance program without gross
wastefulness is based on selective glances across national
borders. Canada's government has been severely shaken by
defense procurement and influence-peddling scandals that
match America's savings-and-loan miseries. None of this has
touched Canada's Medicare, just as the U.S. scandals have
left the Social Security Administration unscathed. Public
corruption is not an exclusively American product; nor
competent public servants exclusively foreign.
   Exaggerated claims are also made that America's undeniably
more numerous poor (and more violent cities) would overwhelm
any national health-insurance system. Additional spending
would indeed be required to cover America's uninsured, but
the GAO estimates the additional cost at $12 billion -- an
amount dwarfed by the administrative savings alone of a
Canadian-style plan. (The costs of the greater violence of
U.S. cities are already incorporated in the budgets of urban
emergency rooms.)
   True but irrelevant to the virtues of national health
insurance is Canada's free-riding on American biomedical
research. Research costs can and should be shared among
industrial nations; a more disciplined American health budget
(and shrunken medical profits) would surely prompt such
pooling.
   The most widespread and silly of the excuses for ignoring
the Canadian experience is the claim that Canadian medical
care is undesirably poor in access, quality and managerial
acumen. Critics of Canadian arrangements make much of
well-publicized bottlenecks in the delivery of some
specialized services. But Canadians generally find it easier
than Americans to obtain most forms of medical care. They
have more general hospital beds per capita, stay longer in
hospital when sick, and use more physician services per
person. If judged by infant mortality and longevity, Canadian
medical care is better than American.
   American medicine needs reform. How to pay for care, how
to distribute the burden of this finance fairly, how to place
defensible borders on what is spent for medical care, and how
to assure that this care is reasonably reliable and
acceptably administered -- these are hard questions. Code
words like "the market," "national health insurance" and
"managed care" provide no answers. We need less talk about
American uniqueness and more willingness to listen to what
others can tell us.
   ---
   Mr. Marmor, a professor at Yale's School of Management,
co-authored with Yale law professor Jerry Mashaw and New York
attorney Philip Harvey "America's Misunderstood Welfare
State" (Basic, 1990). Mr. Harvey assisted with this article.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

