
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920210-0112
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920210-0112.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Enterprise:
   Debate Grows Over Merits of Bush Health-Care Plan
   ---
   Small Businesses Seek Quality
   Coverage and Cost Containment
   ----
   By Jeanne Saddler and Jeffrey A. Tannenbaum
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/10/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2
</SO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)
LIFE INSURANCE (INL)
INSURANCE (INS)
</IN>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Out of the frying pan, into the fire.
   After facing much criticism from small businesses that he
was doing nothing about the health-care crisis, President
Bush last Thursday proposed a $100 billion plan.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   While some entrepreneurs thought parts of the plan could
help small business markedly, others considered the proposal
woefully inadequate. The response suggested that politicians
who want to satisfy small business on health care have their
work cut out for them. While entrepreneurs are preoccupied
with health-care costs, they remain deeply divided about
possible solutions.
   Mr. Bush, aiming to make health care more accessible and
health insurance more affordable, called for "comprehensive
reform" of the nation's health-care system. But he stopped
short of proposing radical changes, such as a national
insurance plan for all Americans.
   Many small-business people praised certain proposals in
the plan, such as the tax credits for many workers who pay
for their own insurance. Some especially liked Mr. Bush's
advocacy of new Health Insurance Networks, or HINs, to
achieve "pooled purchasing power" for small-business
employers. Mr. Bush also proposed letting self-employed
people deduct 100% of health-insurance costs against income,
up from 25% currently. And he proposed curbs on costly
state-mandated features for health-insurance policies that
small companies, among others, buy.
   "There was nothing in the president's speech that I could
basically disagree with from a philosophical point of view,"
said John B. Hexter, owner of a Cleveland graphics company
and the head of Health Action Council of Northeastern Ohio, a
group trying to lower costs and raise quality for health care
in the region. Mr. Hexter said many small Cleveland companies
already save 35% or so on health care through pooling. He
lauded Mr. Bush's effort to spread the concept.
   So did Fredrick M. Valerino Sr., president of Pevco
Systems International Inc., a Baltimore maker of pneumatic
tubes with about 40 employees. "Any inducements to spread the
costs by combining small businesses as purchasers is an
excellent idea," he said, noting that Pevco's
health-insurance costs have tripled in three years.
   For Gerry Harkins, president of Southern Pan Services Co.,
a Conley, Ga., concrete-construction company, the plan's
appeal lay in the proposed tax credits that would enable more
of his employees to afford health insurance. Mr. Bush's plan
"won't burden my business with having to subsidize workers'
health care," Mr. Harkins said.
   But Mr. Bush's package got a cool reception in some
quarters. Gary Kushner, president of Kushner &amp; Co., a
Kalamazoo, Mich., consulting firm that advises small
companies on employee benefits, expressed concern about the
suggestion that Medicare and Medicaid payments be capped.
Health providers might charge private companies more to
offset any cuts in federal payments, he fears. "We're the
ones everyone shifts costs to because we don't have
negotiating power," Mr. Kushner said.
   Moreover, some small-business owners said the nation's
health-care crisis requires much more drastic steps than
those proposed by Mr. Bush. "I love President Bush and I love
Mrs. Bush, but his advisers have advised him totally
incorrectly," said Gloria Walker, an owner of Robert Walker
Plumbing &amp; Heating Inc., in Whitehouse Station, N.J. "The
only sensible thing is a national insurance program."
   Similarly, Fred Wilson, a self-employed bookseller in New
York's Greenwich Village, denounced Mr. Bush's recipe as "a
last-ditch attempt to avoid national health insurance,"
adding: "It's a crime we don't have such insurance."
   Mr. Wilson, who said he has no health insurance, had mixed
feelings about Mr. Bush's proposal to make health-insurance
costs fully tax-deductible for the self-employed. While
helpful for those who can afford insurance, he said, the tax
break would be useless for those who can't.
   Many lobbyists and business owners were cautious in their
comments, saying they needed more time to study how the
program would work. "In sum, we like it, but God is in the
details," said John Polk, executive director of the Council
of Smaller Enterprises, Cleveland, which among other things
operates an insurance pool for small companies.
   Despite the president's speech, and competing health-care
proposals from Mr. Bush's Democratic foes, there's no general
feeling in the small-business community that cost relief on
health care will come soon, if at all.
   "I saw the president's proposal and I watched the
Democratic response, and I'm not very impressed with either
of them," said Robert Winet, president of Added Value Storage
&amp; Moving Center, Santa Monica, Calif. He said small-business
people will lose because politicians on both sides won't sit
down and work something out. "But I'm delighted the president
recognized the need to make a proposal," he said.
   The National Federation of Independent Business, the
biggest small-business lobbying group, praised the Bush
program's support of bare-bones insurance plans, caps on
federal Medicare and Medicaid payments, managed health-care
systems and malpractice-insurance reform. John Motley, the
group's chief lobbyist, said, however, he expects that only
legislation affecting several insurance-industry practices
will pass this year. (They've been put forward in a bill by
Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, the Texas Democrat, with support from the
Bush administration.)
   Other small-business groups were more restrained in their
assessment of Mr. Bush's ideas. "We're pleased that the
president has entered the health-care debate," said John
Satagaj, president of the Small Business Legislative Council,
which represents 100 trade groups. "Our No. 1 concern is cost
control, and we hope to work with all parties on that."
   Susan Hager, president of National Small Business United,
another small-business lobbying group, said that for any
proposal to overhaul health care to be sound, it has to
address cost-containment, access to health care and quality.
"But so far nobody's come up with the answer," she added. She
predicted, in any case, that no such overhaul is likely to be
enacted this year.
   Such pessimism was common. "Our sense is that there'll be
cosmetic changes, so Congress and the administration can
claim something is being done between now and November," said
Gary Petty, president of the National Moving &amp; Storage
Association. "But I don't see a lot of trickle-down coming to
small business."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

