
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910624-0157
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910624-0157.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Ills of the Nation's Health-Care System
   Are Pulling GOP Into Search for Cures
   ---
   At a Divided White House,
   Sununu Is Wary, While
   Darman Calls for Action
   ----
   By Michel McQueen
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/24/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)
INSURANCE (INS)
</IN>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- The American Medical Association leaders who
met with White House officials last month to discuss ideas
for health-care reform found themselves dismayed at the
bedside manner and unhappy with the diagnosis.
   Chief of Staff John Sununu complained the doctors were too
sympathetic to Democratic proposals to overhaul the
health-care system and bluntly warned them to slow down. "He
led us to believe the Bush administration was not going to be
stampeded into anything," said one of the doctors, who left
the White House convinced the administration was going to
take its "own sweet time" in addressing the issue.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   To date, the administration's prescription for the
nation's health-care problems has been: Take two aspirin and
call us in a couple of years. Despite skyrocketing health
costs and more than 30 million uninsured people, the White
House has virtually steered clear of the subject.
   In recent weeks, though, at least some of the president's
advisers have begun to call for a change. While Mr. Sununu
continues to argue against addressing the issue, Budget
Director Richard Darman has said publicly he believes the
White House should propose a sweeping health-care reform by
next year. And others, like presidential pollster Robert
Teeter, are reluctantly concluding that the issue may be too
hot to be ignored.
   "Clearly there is a real need to get behind this," says
GOP political consultant Rich Bond. "Just as the Democrats
can be seen to be floundering around on foreign-policy
issues, the Republicans have not yet put their best minds to
work on the health-care issue."
   Former Bush campaign adviser Deborah Steelman, one of the
few Republican strategists who has been following the issue,
says many of her party have come to believe that "health care
is to the '90s what taxes were to the '80s." She adds, "If we
give away this issue, we are giving away the game of the
decade."
   Political pressure for health-care reform is clearly on
the rise. Business and interest groups are up in arms,
members of Congress are restless, and Health and Human
Services Secretary Louis Sullivan has been sounding alarms
about rising needs and costs.
   So far, however, President Bush has said little. The
administration has made some modest proposals on infant
health care, immunizing preschool children and capping
medical-liability costs. But the president has put little
effort into promoting them -- in one case abandoning a
long-planned trip to Chicago and sending Vice President
Quayle as a substitute.
   In part, the White House reticence dates back to the 1988
campaign. Health care for the uninsured was a signature issue
for Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis, who started a plan
to provide benefits to the uninsured in his native
Massachusetts. Bush advisers, however, paid only cursory
attention to the issue, preferring to focus on education and
the environment, issues where they felt they had a stronger
hand.
   Many political strategists continue to defend a low-key
approach through the 1992 campaign. At a health-policy group
last month, GOP pollster Bill McInturff reiterated the view
that "people most concerned with the {issue} were not big
parts of the Republican coalition." Mr. McInturff's review of
ABC News exit-polling data for the group showed those who
identified health care as their primary concern mainly fell
into four subgroups: the uninsured, the poor, Hispanics and
blacks. These groups voted for Mr. Dukakis in margins ranging
from from 56% to 88%, he said.
   Republican National Committee Chairman Clayton Yeutter,
who has been at White House strategy meetings where health
care has been discussed, also plays down the issue. It's "an
issue that will have to be confronted by the nation sometime
in the next few years," he says, but for now "there clearly
is not a consensus in the Republican Party . . . about what
the answers should be." His advice: "I wouldn't put it in the
top five" problems facing the country.
   Mr. Yeutter's comments echo those made by Mr. Sununu in
April at a meeting with Republican Reps. Bill Archer of Texas
and John Kasich of Ohio, who had been tossing around ideas on
the issue. At present, health is a losing game for the GOP,
Mr. Sununu said, because the Democrats will always "up the
ante" -- promising more benefits and more coverage with
little regard for the costs. Republicans inevitably will be
cast as a bunch of Scrooges, he argued, unwilling to help the
nation's helpless Tiny Tims.
   Spearheading the other side, however, is Mr. Darman. In a
meeting with reporters earlier this month, he argued that the
White House should come up with a comprehensive
health-care-reform plan before the 1992 election. The issue
could then be debated during the campaign, he said, clearing
the way for a giant legislative package shortly after the
election.
   Asked whether Mr. Sununu agreed with his view, Mr. Darman
paused, then replied: "I don't know."
   Mr. Teeter, a close political adviser to the president,
also seems to be slowly acknowledging a need to address the
issue, although he continues to express skepticism about
plans for a big fix. "My view is that . . . when you've got a
problem this big . . . that has huge financial implications,
it never gets solved in a democracy in one fell swoop," he
says. "You bite off pieces of the problem and let the system
digest the changes."
   Some Republican officials have found an even more
persuasive argument for addressing health-care problems
closer to home -- in the illness and death of former party
chairman Lee Atwater. Mr. Atwater was stricken in March 1990
with what turned out to be an inoperable brain tumor, but he
remained on the Republican National Committee payroll and
health plan. The insurance carrier threatened to triple the
committee's rates unless it dropped Mr. Atwater's coverage.
Instead, the committee changed insurance companies. But rates
are now so high, says Mr. Yeutter, "that many of our
not-very-well-paid young people can't afford the coverage."
   (See related story: "Congressional Republicans Find They
Are Facing `Revolt of the Haves'" -- WSJ June 24, 1991)
</TEXT>
</DOC>

