
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911211-0079
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911211-0079.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Pricing Health Care:
   Don't Look for Better Health
   From National Health Insurance
   ---
   By Victor Fuchs
</HL>
<DATE>
12/11/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)
INSURANCE (INS)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   With some exceptions, such as Medicare, health insurance
in the U.S. is a private, voluntary matter. Most Americans
are insured. The one in seven who are not can be grouped into
six categories:
   1. The poor. The largest group of the uninsured consists
of individuals and families whose low income makes it
unfeasible for them to acquire insurance, either on their own
or as a condition of employment. About 20% of the uninsured
have no connection with the workforce, but the rest are
either employed or are dependents of employed persons. The
Health Insurance Association of America, the principal
association of private health insurers, estimates that 31% of
uninsured workers earned less than $10,000 in 1989; another
estimate puts the figure at 63%. In any case, it is clear
that the great majority of uninsured workers cannot afford to
give up a substantial fraction of their wages in order to
obtain health insurance.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The frequently heard explanation, "small employers cannot
provide health insurance" is misleading. Employers do not
bear the costs of insurance; workers do, in the form of lower
wages. Lawyers, accountants and other highly paid
professionals organized in small firms usually have health
insurance. A more accurate description of the problem would
be, "many workers in small firms cannot afford health
insurance."
   2. The sick and disabled. Many men and women who are not
poor are still unable to afford health insurance because they
have special health problems and therefore face very high
premiums or are excluded from some coverage entirely.
   3. The "difficult." Some people are neither poor nor sick,
but have difficulty in obtaining insurance at average
premiums. They may be self-employed or out of the labor force
entirely. In order to reach and service such individuals,
insurance companies incur abnormally high sales and
administrative costs.
   4. Low users. Some people do not expect to use much
medical care. They may be in particularly good health; they
may be Christian Scientists. For them, health insurance is a
bad buy unless they can acquire it at below-average premiums.
   5. Gamblers. Most people buy health insurance in part
because they are risk averse. They would rather pay a fixed,
known premium than run the risk of a huge expense in event of
a serious illness. But not everyone is risk averse: The
gambler says, "I'd rather save the premium and take my
chances."
   6. Free-riders. The final category consists of individuals
who remain uninsured because they believe that if they do get
sick, they will get care anyway, with somebody else picking
up the bill.
   Review of the six categories suggests that national health
insurance is, from an analytic point of view, rather simple:
All it requires is subsidization of those who are unable to
afford insurance and compulsion of those who are unwilling to
acquire it. The best short explanation of why the U.S. does
not have national health insurance is that the majority of
Americans have resisted subsidizing those who are unable to
afford it and have been reluctant to force coverage on those
who do not obtain it voluntarily.
   Opponents of national health insurance frequently assert
that it would result in a substantial increase in the total
cost of care. In fact, on a per-capita basis, and adjusting
for differences in real income, the U.S. spends much more on
medical care than any other country. The average American
spends about 40% more than the average Canadian. And Canada
spends more per capita than any European country.
   How can this be? Countries with national health insurance
find other methods to contain health care spending. The most
obvious saving is in administration: In the U.S.,
approximately 6% of national health expenditure is accounted
for by administration. To this must be added several
percentage points incurred by providers for billing and other
administrative activities directly attributable to the
American system of financing care. By contrast, the Canadian
system of provincial health insurance imposes minimal
administrative and billing costs on providers and payors.
   But savings on administration are only part of the answer.
Nearly all countries with national health insurance rely
heavily on what I call "upstream resource allocation." The
key to this type of resource allocation is governmental
control of capital investment in facilities and equipment,
speciality mix of physicians and the development and
diffusion of high-cost medical technology. There are, for
instance, more physicians per capita in Canada than in the
U.S., but there are many fewer who specialize in complex
surgical and diagnostic procedures.
   The price that Canadians and Europeans pay for such
controls is delay or inconvenience in obtaining access to
high-tech services, and in some cases not receiving such
services at all. Whether such delays or denials have a
significant effect on the health of the popuation is not
known with certainty.
   There is no conclusive answer to the question: Does
national health insurance improve the health of the
population by increasing access to care -- or does it worsen
health by constraining the introduction of new technology and
destroying incentives? In my judgment, national health
insurance has little effect on health one way or the other.
   In particular, national health insurance does not
eliminate or even substantially reduce differentials in
health outcomes across socioeconomic groups. In England, for
instance, infant mortality in the lowest socioeconomic class
is double the rate of the highest class, just as it was
before the introduction of national health insurance in the
late 1940s.
   Even in the relatively homogenous populations of
egalitarian Scandinavia, life expectancy varies considerably:
The age-standardized mortality rate for male hotel,
restaurant and food service workers is double that for
teachers and technical workers. In Sweden, a study of
age-standardized death rates among men 45-64 found
substantial differentials across occupations in 1966-70 and
slightly greater differentials in 1976-80.
   National health insurance does seem to control health
costs, but it doesn't much improve health outcomes. Will
lower costs alone suffice to overcome America's reluctance to
subsidize and compel people in a national health insurance
system? In my view, the prospects in the short run are poor.
Some public opinion polls indicate a readiness for national
health insurance, but they are not credible indicators of
political behavior.
   In the long run, though, national health insurance is not
dead. The need to curb costs will push the country toward a
national system, although the timing will depend largely on
political factors producing a major change in the political
climate. Short of that, we should expect modest attempts from
Washington to increase coverage and contain costs,
accompanied by immodest amounts of sound and fury.
   ---
   Mr. Fuchs is a professor of economics at Stanford
University. This is adapted from an article in the winter
issue of Health Affairs.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

