
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920108-0155
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920108-0155.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy
   ---
   Democratic Candidates and The Issues:
   Democrats Fire Away at Health-Care System
   As a Campaign Issue, but Most Miss the Target
   ----
   By Walt Bogdanich
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/08/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)
INSURANCE (INS)
</IN>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   {Third of a Series}
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   NASHUA, N.H. -- It was to be the political coming-out
party for health-care reform: a debate among the major
Democratic presidential candidates, attended by hundreds of
party activists and televised to countless voters across the
state.
   For the next 90 minutes, said the moderator, Sen. John D.
Rockefeller, "there will be nothing but health care
discussed." But anyone expecting a serious discussion of the
issue was sorely disappointed. Instead, the audience heard
plenty of angry attacks on the current health-care system, a
few jokes, many catchy sound bites -- and precious few
details on specific plans.
   Accurately, if unintentionally, the debate last month
summed up the state of the Democratic candidates' thinking on
health care. The party has been handed a gold-plated
political issue, yet most of the candidates are simply
criticizing the current system without saying specifically
how they would change it.
   Only one candidate, Sen. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, has
managed to seize the issue; he has put out an 84-page
treatise on how to restructure health-care financing in the
nation. Former Sen. Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts also has
devoted attention to the issue. But the other four candidates
-- Sen. Tom Harkin of Iowa, Govs. Bill Clinton of Arkansas
and Douglas Wilder of Virginia, and former Gov. Jerry Brown
of California -- have few detailed plans on how to slow
rising health-care costs -- which are expected to hit 14% of
gross national product this year -- or how to provide
coverage for nearly 40 million uninsured Americans.
   Sen. Kerrey's involvement in the issue predates his
presidential bid. Beginning in 1989, a 15-member panel of
congressmen and presidential appointees -- known informally
as the Pepper Commission -- set out on the seemingly
impossible task of solving the nation's health-care problems.
Just as the panel prepared to march off into a swamp of
stunningly complex theories of health-care financing, Sen.
Rockefeller, its chairman, received an unexpected request.
   "A new senator by the name of Bob Kerrey came up to me and
said, `I want to audit this,"' Sen. Rockefeller recalls. "I
said, `Are you serious?"' He was. And despite his observer
status, Sen. Kerrey ended up attending commission meetings
that even some panel members missed.
   Now, like the Pepper Commission -- whose final report was
dead on arrival for being politically unworkable -- Sen.
Kerrey is discovering that health-care reform, while great
for sloganeering, is one tough sell on specifics. In fact,
Mr. Kerrey sometimes finds himself on the defensive precisely
because he is the candidate with the best-developed proposal
-- and thus is the most visible target.
   Sen. Kerrey's plan would drastically alter the current
system of financing care, in part by uncoupling health
insurance coverage from employment -- meaning that people
would no longer have to fear financial ruin simply because
they took a new job, lost their job or worked for a company
that provided poor medical benefits.
   To control costs and provide access to health care, Sen.
Kerrey wants to create a federal commission that would
recommend to Congress how much should be spent overall on
such care. Individual states would then distribute the money
to qualified health-care plans.
   Under this proposal, patients would be free to choose
their doctors and hospitals. In contrast to Canada's national
health system -- in which care is provided to everyone and is
paid for by the government, which also regulates doctors'
fees and hospital budgets -- insurance companies could still
offer competing health plans. But they would be forbidden to
reject anyone, as they often do now on the basis of
pre-existing medical conditions.
   Sen. Kerrey says he would fund health care by eliminating
Medicare and Medicaid and by, among other things, imposing a
new payroll tax of 4% on employers and 1% on employees. To
help small business, the first $30,000 of a firm's payroll
would be exempt.
   It's "not a free ride," says Sen. Kerrey, noting that some
families could pay as much as $2,000 a year extra in
out-of-pocket expenses. "But for most Americans, this new way
of paying will mean they pay less." If doctors and hospitals
know that there is only so much money to go around and that
any wasteful expenditures "would come out of their hide," he
says, they'd be more likely to help police their colleagues
and competitors.
   Insurance companies, which would compete against state-run
plans offering basic benefit packages, criticize Mr. Kerrey's
proposal for putting too much decision-making in the hands of
government. Other critics say Kerrey's plan is too complex to
sell to the American public.
   Apart from Mr. Kerrey's, the most detailed health-care
reform proposal comes from former Sen. Tsongas. Although
personal experiences underlie both candidates' presentations
-- Mr. Kerrey lost part of a leg from a war wound, and Mr.
Tsongas had cancer -- they prescribe differing remedies.
   Mr. Tsongas, in contrast to Mr. Kerrey, embraces the
so-called managed competition concept. He would promote cost
control through marketplace changes that would include giving
consumers more information so they could shop intelligently
for health plans.
   Mr. Tsongas wouldn't uncouple health care from employment
but would require businesses to provide a choice of insurance
plans for full-time employees and to pay a tax for certain
part-time employees. Those not covered, including the
unemployed, would get private health insurance through plans
negotiated by a state agency.
   Mr. Tsongas's plan is attacked by people such as Ted
Marmor, a professor at the Yale School of Organization and
Management, who supports a single-payer system. (Under such a
system, a single government-created entity would handle all
payments for care, replacing the current system in which
insurance companies, the federal government, states,
businesses and individuals all have a role.) "We've got no
recent evidence of the market working the way pro-market
people say they'd like it to work," Mr. Marmor says. "The
trouble with this theory is that it's a theory."
   Mr. Tsongas insists that a major revamping of the system
is inevitable. "National health insurance is coming, and the
Democrats are going to deliver national health insurance,
period," he says. But he also criticizes some other
candidates for failing to provide specifics: "Put your plan
on the table. I don't want secret plans."
   But that is largely what the other candidates' positions
amount to. None of them, for instance, has even proposed
mechanisms to pay for their proposals.
   Gov. Clinton is still weighing solutions to the
health-care problem; the governor skipped the Nashua forum,
citing a schedule conflict. Rather than offering a specific
plan, says policy adviser John Kroger, Gov. Clinton "feels
much more comfortable in setting out the goals and general
idea of where he thinks we ought to head." The candidate says
he would find a way to promote insurance reform, control the
unnecessary spread of technology, stop drug prices from
rising so rapidly and attack billing fraud. "We don't need to
reduce quality; we need to restructure the system," he says.
   In recent days, Sen. Kerrey has sharpened his attack on
Gov. Clinton's positions. "The governor has been vague and
very imprecise, obviously because he doesn't want to take on
the vested interests," the senator charged yesterday in a
television interview.
   Sen. Harkin, meanwhile, proclaims that "health care isn't
a privilege of wealth but a basic right of every American
citizen"a line that none of his competitors would argue with
-- and wins populist political points by calling for
legislation "that says until Congress passes a health-care
bill for the rest of America, their free health care should
be cut off."
   Beyond that, though, his health-care platform is short on
specifics. Talking of the deaths of his two sisters from
breast cancer, he argues for more preventive care and "a new
commitment to medical research." He also promises to trim the
health care bureaucracy "so doctors and nurses can focus on
patients instead of paperwork."
   Former Gov. Brown strongly supports a single-payer system
as the only way to control costs. He also attacks "the
medical industrial complex," which includes pharmaceutical
companies, hospitals and equipment makers, as a powerful
political lobby that must be defeated before true reform can
occur. Virginia Gov. Wilder promises to disclose his
health-care reform package soon.
   Sen. Rockefeller, who has become the Democratic godfather
of health-care reform, insists he isn't worried that his
party's presidential candidates haven't yet found their
clearest voice on the subject. "This is tough stuff," he
acknowledges. But he says that even the disappointing Nashua
debate served a purpose: It and other debates to come, he
says, are helping the candidates gain the confidence on the
issue that will allow them to take on President Bush.
   `Public anger," the West Virginian adds, "is our greatest
ally."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

