
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920115-0046
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920115-0046.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Roads to Reform --
   Health Care Choices:
   A Bigger Federal Role
   Or a Market Approach?
   ---
   Stage Is Set for Showdown
   As Bush and Democrats
   Take Very Different Paths
   ---
   A Focus of Coming Campaign
   ----
   By Hilary Stout
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/15/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR TAXES
</CO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)
INSURANCE (INS)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)
TAXES (TAX)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- George Bush is on the verge of igniting what
could become one of the biggest ideological battles of the
1990s: a fight over the future of the ailing American
health-care system.
   At the heart of the debate is a fundamental question: Can
the market for health care work like the market for autos or
tomatoes? Or is health care an exception, like defense and
highways, that is unsuited to market mechanisms and must be
provided by the government?
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Nearly every other developed country has given up on the
market as a means of dispensing health care. But the Bush
administration hasn't. The plan it is now crafting behind
closed doors is an effort to use market forces to address the
nation's two overwhelming health-care problems: runaway costs
and limited access.
   Most Democrats, in contrast, believe that only increased
government involvement can cure these ills, although they
differ over the degree of federal control that's necessary.
The result is almost certain to be a showdown. While on other
issues the two parties often drift toward middleground
compromises, on health care, many on both sides agree that
the middle of the road is the most dangerous place to be.
   "These are fundamentally different alternatives. They
don't lend themselves to a mix-and-match approach," White
House Budget Director Richard Darman, a leading architect of
the administration's plan, recently told Congress. "If we
wish to have a coherent approach to reform, the political
system will have to choose one of the conceptual
alternatives."
   Ever since Pennsylvania's Harris Wofford, campaigning for
national health insurance, upset former Attorney General Dick
Thornburgh in a U.S. Senate race, President Bush has been
under heavy pressure to come up with a plan to address
America's health-care problems. While he hasn't made final
decisions about what he'll propose, and many of the proposals
will be seen as tiny steps, the principles that will guide
the president's plan are now clear:
   The administration's plan would give low-income people the
means, probably through tax credits, to buy their own private
insurance rather than having the government provide it
directly;
   It will offer incentives to prod people into enrolling in
health-maintenance organizations or other prepaid health
systems, which are generally less costly;
   And it will include measures intended to reform the
private health-insurance market and ensure that people with
high health risks can still get insurance.
   The package stands in stark contrast to the positions
being staked out by leading Democrats in Congress and in the
presidential campaign. A number are proposing a
Canadian-style system that would have the government provide
taxpayer-financed health coverage to everyone and would
regulate the fees of hospitals and doctors. Others are
advocating a less-radical "play or pay" system that requires
businesses to either provide insurance to all employees or
contribute to a government-financed health plan. Even
advocates of play or pay, however, favor expanded government
power to control health-care costs.
   The federal government is already the largest player in
health care. Through Medicare, a program for the elderly, and
Medicaid, for the poor, as well as through programs for
soldiers and veterans, the federal government accounts for
42% of the roughly $700 billion spent on health care each
year. The Bush administration has no immediate plans to
replace those programs, although its budget due out later
this month will propose large savings in Medicare and
Medicaid.
   Nearly everyone seems to agree the current system doesn't
work very well, and cries for fixing it are becoming ever
louder. An estimated 37 million Americans are without health
insurance, a number swelled by the loss of more than a
million jobs during the recession. Some people keep jobs
they'd like to leave just to retain the health coverage.
Other employees complain that their employers are pushing an
increasing portion of health costs on them. At the same time,
employers also feel heavily burdened by the rising cost of
health care for employees, a concern that sometimes
influences their hiring plans.
   "I can think of no other issue more important to the
middle class and to small business than health care," Karl
Hall, the owner of a small transportation brokerage firm,
recently told Democratic senators.
   The rising political pressure virtually guarantees that
health care will remain a top issue in Washington for the
next decade. And the stark contrast between administration
and Democratic approaches ensures that as long as both
parties have power, it won't be easy to solve. Here is a look
at the plan taking shape within the Bush administration, as
well as the rival Democratic schemes:
                                                                                                       

   Bush: Market Forces
                                                                                                       

   Democrats will immediately attack the White House health
plan as piecemeal reform and futile life-support of a system
that is terminally ill. But some of the president's advisers
see it as a first step down a path of radical transformation
of the health-care system that they plan to follow more
boldly after the election.
   The Bush administration is learning what serious students
of U.S. health care have known for years: It is a huge and
enormously complex system in which attempts to make modest
improvements often backfire and make things worse. This
pattern leads analysts to advocate major overhaul. But
overhauling an industry that now accounts for 12% of the
economy frightens consensus-seeking politicians.
   Some of Mr. Bush's political advisers have been urging his
new chief of staff, Samuel Skinner, not to rush into the
morass. Mr. Skinner has been soliciting views of the American
Medical Association and of corporate heavyweights, and even
allowing visitors to cross-examine White House health
planners.
   Yesterday Mr. Bush met with about a dozen representatives
of a group advocating a free-market approach to health-care
overhaul. According to people who were there, the president
said Americans are ready for "sound and sensible" health-care
reform, but stressed that he didn't want to do anything that
would hurt the economy or cost jobs. The group urged him not
to propose politically explosive measures, such as putting a
cap on the income-tax exemption for benefits.
   The philosophy behind the plan is espoused by many
conservative economists who believe they can use the tax code
to fix the system by making people more sensitive to the cost
of their health care, and by forcing insurers, doctors,
hospitals, nursing homes and all others to compete on price
and quality for patients' business. But critics say there
isn't enough information made available for people to shop
intelligently.
   One means of sensitizing people to cost would be to limit
the amount of employer-provided health benefits exempt from
income tax. All are currently exempt, undermining the
incentive for employees or companies to question the cost of
care. The administration is studying a proposal that would
require people earning more than $100,000 a year to pay
income tax on any health benefits they get from their
employer that exceed $4,000 a year. This would affect
relatively few people, but administration officials look at
this as a foot in the door. They argue that the proposal
would establish an important principle, and that the limits
could be lowered in the future.
   In order to deal with some of the 37 million people who
have no insurance, the administration would provide tax
credits or vouchers for the purchase of insurance. The plan
is likely to limit these to people with incomes of no more
than 150% of the poverty line. That would mean covering only
a fraction of those now uninsured, but again, the move would
establish a position that could be expanded later.
   By using tax credits or vouchers, rather than providing
government insurance outright, the administration hopes to
force people to shop for the best quality coverage at the
lowest price. Under the freemarket approach, tax credits or
vouchers might even eventually replace Medicaid and Medicare,
further reducing the government's role.
   The White House plan also will aim to give the insurance
industry a push toward the market, including measures that
would make it easier for small businesses and individuals to
band together into large risk pools that would lower their
premiums. In addition, it would provide a variety of measures
to compel insurance companies to continue to provide health
coverage to people with serious medical conditions. And there
would be new incentives to encourage people, starting with
those on Medicaid and Medicare, to enroll in organizations
providing prepaid health care. In theory, such groups have a
greater incentive to control costs.
   The administration is also considering a proposal to make
it easier for middle-class taxpayers to deduct some health
expenses.
   Mr. Bush has not made any final decisions about what he
will propose, administration officials say. Though he earlier
said he would have a health-care plan ready for his State of
the Union Message Jan. 28, officials now say he will begin to
lay out the plan in the speech, and unveil a detailed
proposal a few weeks later.
                                                                                                       

   Democrats: More Government
                                                                                                       

   Democrats have introduced dozens of health-care-reform
bills over the past year, all based on the premise that
private markets can't be expected to address such a
fundamental human need as health. "No one can distribute
Gucci loafers better than the market," says Uwe Reinhardt, a
Princeton economist who specializes in health care. "But a
pure market cannot distribute health care."
   Though many Democrats contend that enacting
taxpayer-financed universal health insurance is politically
impossible in the U.S., some influential Democrats back that
approach. They include Rep. Pete Stark, chairman of a House
health subcommittee, and a Democratic presidential candidate,
Sen. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska.
   Under a Canadian-style national health system, Americans
would receive government-paid hospital, doctor and dental
care, as well as prescription drugs, mental health services
and long-term care. This would not be full-blown socialized
medicine; everyone could choose his own private-sector
doctor, hospital or nursing home. But the government would be
deeply involved in setting the budgets of hospitals and
nursing homes and establishing fees for doctors and other
health-care providers.
   While patients would spend virtually nothing on care,
they'd pay for that benefit with higher taxes. Rep. Marty
Russo (D., Ill.), the chief sponsor of a leading national
health insurance bill, contends that the country would
actually end up saving $40 billion on health expenditures
overall. Businesses wouldn't have to buy health insurance for
their employees. Consumers wouldn't have to pay premiums or
deductibles. Hospitals wouldn't raise bills to make up for
bad debts. And most people believe the system could save tens
of billions of dollars on paper work if the government were
the only health-care customer.
   But others argue that a nationalized system would be
vastly more expensive, by encouraging people to seek
unnecessary care. "National health insurance would give us
all the compassion of the IRS and the efficiency of the
postal service -- at Pentagon prices," declares Constance
Horner, until recently the No. 2 official at the Health and
Human Services Department.
   Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell is among Democrats
pushing for lessradical change, a "pay or play" plan. The
government would draw up a package of core benefits and
require every employer to offer them to employees or else pay
a percent of payroll (as yet undetermined) to finance a
public plan for all working or unemployed people lacking
insurance.
   To hold down costs, the Mitchell proposal would establish
a "federal health expenditure board," with stature and
independence similar to the Federal Reserve Board, which
would set national health spending goals. While the board
wouldn't be able to set prices, it would try to negotiate
recommended rates of payment with health-care providers.
Similar pay-or-play legislation, submitted by House Ways and
Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.), would
limit the annual growth in both public and private health
spending to the growth in the gross national product, and
authorize the government to set nationwide fees for doctors,
hospitals and other providers at whatever level is needed to
adhere to that restriction.
   Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.), chairman of the House
Labor and Human Resources Committee, says the panel will take
up the Mitchell bill when Congress reconvenes next week.
   Many experts argue that comprehensive health-care overhaul
will only be achieved incrementally. The U.S. political
process, they say, is too cumbersome for radical change. But
even those who favor a cautious approach say it is critical
that the nation decide on which general direction it is
heading: toward more competition or toward more regulation.
Which course the nation takes could well be decided by this
year's presidential and congressional elections.
   ---
   Staff reporter David Wessel contributed to this article.
   ---
            Competing Health-Care Philosophies
                                                                                                       

                     BUSH                 DEMOCRAT
                    ------      ----------------------------
                    MARKET      GOVERNMENT RUN   PAY OR PLAY
                                                                                                       

 Access for all     Yes          Yes            Yes
                    eventually
                                                                                                       

                                                                                                       

 Cost control       Left to      Gov.'t-set     Some gov.'t
                    marketplace  budgets        intervention
                                                                                                       

                                                                                                       

 Quality assurance  Left to      Undetermined   Undetermined
                    marketplace
                                                                                                       

                                                                                                       

 New mandated       No           Yes            Yes
 employer spending
 or tax
                                                                                                       

                                                                                                       

 Major role for     Yes          Generally no   Yes
 private insurers
                                                                                                       

                                                                                                       

 Tax exemption for  Capped or    Not            Unlimited
 employer-paid      eventually   applicable
 premiums           eliminated
                                                                                                       

                                                                                                       

 Tax credits to     Yes          No             No
 cover health
 insurance
                                                                                                       

                                                                                                       

 Medicare and       Could be     Replaced with  Replaced
 Medicaid           eliminated   national       with public
                    over time    health         plan for
                                 insurance      those not
                                                covered by
                                                employers
</TEXT>
</DOC>

