
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910910-0071
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910910-0071.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Apply Marshall's Principles to Clarence Thomas
   ----
   By James S. Robbins
</HL>
<DATE>
09/10/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20
</SO>
<IN>
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<NS>
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
SUPREME COURT (SUP)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   With hearings scheduled to begin today, the nomination of
Judge Clarence Thomas to the U.S. Supreme Court has again
raised questions concerning the responsibilities of senators
and nominees during the confirmation process.
   Some of Mr. Thomas's opponents have warned that they
intend to make him answer very explicit questions about his
personal and philosophical beliefs, in order to avoid
repeating the example of David Souter, "the stealth
candidate." But if Mr. Thomas does refuse to answer explicit
questions, it will not be merely Mr. Souter's example he will
be following -- it will be that of the justice he has been
nominated to replace, Thurgood Marshall.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Sen. Howard Metzenbaum (D., Ohio) has said that the Senate
is "entitled to a direct, categorical answer" on Judge
Thomas's stance on abortion, and on Roe v. Wade. Thurgood
Marshall's example makes it plain, though, that Mr. Thomas
may refuse to give that categorical answer. During the
Marshall hearings in 1967, the issue of the day was not
abortion but crime, and the most controversial case was
Miranda v. Arizona.
   Sen. John L. McClellan (D., Ark.) pressed Mr. Marshall to
reveal his opinion of the case. Mr. Marshall refused,
explaining that there were other cases pending on variations
and interpretations of Miranda and that, if confirmed to the
Supreme Court, he would have to rule on those cases: "On
decisions that are certain to be re-examined in the court, it
would be improper for me to comment on them in advance. . . .
From all the hearings I have read about, it has been
considered and recognized as improper for a nominee to a
judgeship to comment on a case he will have to pass on."
   Sen. McClellan emphasized that he did not want comments on
a future case, but on a past case, Miranda. But Mr. Marshall
held firm, stating that future cases would be related to
interpretations of Miranda, and that the issue of crime was
still very controversial.
   Sen. Sam Ervin (D., N.C.) attempted to get Mr. Marshall to
discuss the case law that preceded Miranda, in much the same
way that Sen. Joe Biden (D., Del.) attempted to persuade
Judge Souter to comment on the right of privacy at issue in
the abortion cases, by way of Griswold v. Connecticut. But
Mr. Marshall would not even remark on the 14 words in the
Fifth Amendment concerning self-incrimination.
   Sen. Ervin, exasperated, pointed out that since the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is so broad that a case on
practically any issue might come before it, Mr. Marshall's
theory meant that the committee would have a difficult time
asking any questions about Mr. Marshall's judicial
philosophy. "It is a problem," Mr. Marshall said, though a
problem for the committee, not the nominee. In the end, Mr.
Marshall would comment only on such long-decided cases as the
Gibbons v. Ogden case of 1824, which concerned issues of such
vintage that they were no longer controversial.
   Some of Mr. Thomas's detractors have openly worried that
he seems too distant from his origins in the segregated
South. Eleanor Holmes Norton, delegate to Congress from the
District of Columbia, said that she hoped he would "bring to
the bench his personal experience as a poor black man."
Harvard Law School's Derrick Bell fears that Mr. Thomas would
"look black but think white."
   But such personal experiences are irrelevant to the work
of a justice of the Supreme Court, according to Thurgood
Marshall. "A judge is not permitted to use his own personal
views under any circumstances," he said, "but if the
particular decision-maker, whether he be judge or justice or
magistrate, applies the Constitution to the facts and it
comes out that way, that is inevitable." Sometimes the
outcome of a case is incidentally related to a justice's
private views, but personal preferences can play no part in
the decision-making process. Such crusading zeal is
inappropriate, despite the 1990 call of Sen. Paul Simon (D.,
Ill.) for a nominee with "fire in the belly." "There is
nothing personal allowed, nothing personal," Mr. Marshall
emphasized. Justices "shall not use their personal views, and
indeed, they take an oath not to do so."
   The intellectual leaders of the coalition that defeated
the Bork nomination, notably Laurence Tribe in his 1987 book,
"God Bless This Honorable Court," insisted that the Senate
had the right -- and the responsibility -- to scrutinize a
nominee's general political or judicial philosophy. This
issue was raised in the Marshall hearings too. Clearly a
senator may vote any way he wishes on a nomination, and for
any reason; but not all votes nor all reasons are consistent
with the duties of senators, and with the manner in which
they ought to behave. This thought was expressed most
eloquently by Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.), whose primary
contribution to the Marshall hearings was elucidating the
normative guidelines for senators.
   Sen. Kennedy stressed a central point both in the
committee room and before the full Senate: The Senate is to
assess qualifications; it is not to examine political or
judicial philosophy. "We are not charged with the
responsibility of approving a man to be associate justice of
the Supreme Court only if his views always coincide with our
own," Sen. Kennedy stated. "We are not seeking a nominee for
the Supreme Court who will express the majority view of the
Senate on every given issue, or on a given issue of
fundamental importance." It was Sen. Kennedy's view that only
the professional background of a nominee was relevant for
senatorial consideration, not his substantive views.
   The question of "ideological balance" on the court was
also raised in this context, and addressed by Sen. Roman
Hruska (D., Neb.). Sen. Hruska had received letters stating
that Mr. Marshall was too liberal for the Supreme Court, that
he would upset the "balance" between liberals and
conservatives. Sen. Hruska dismissed these fears as
irrelevant. "The nominating power lies with the president of
the United States; and if it is his desire to appoint someone
he considers a liberal, that is his prerogative. If he wants
to nominate someone he considers a conservative, that is also
his prerogative." The role of the Senate is to "inquire into
the integrity, the competence and the record of a man," not
his ideology.
   Several other issues were brought up during the Marshall
hearings that have a bearing on Judge Thomas's case. Sen.
Kennedy believed that because Mr. Marshall had been moved
through the Judiciary Committee before, the Senate could
"move expeditiously ahead with his confirmation." Mr. Thomas,
too, has been previously approved by the committee. Mr.
Marshall had been accused of having communist ties, in part
because in one case he cited a work by Herbert Aptheker, a
leading U.S. communist theoretician. Committee Chairman James
Eastland (D., Miss.) raised this issue, but only to allow Mr.
Marshall to clarify the facts, and to state that he was not a
communist. Mr. Thomas's supposed ties to Louis Farrakhan seem
entitled to equal treatment.
   Finally, the fact that Mr. Marshall was black was treated
as noteworthy, but not determinative. In the case of Judge
Thomas, blackness ought to be regarded the same way. The fact
that Mr. Thomas's judicial views are not the same as those of
Thurgood Marshall is a reflection of the increasingly
pluralistic nature of black society, but hardly an issue
worthy of senatorial consideration. As the second black
American to serve on the Supreme Court, Judge Thomas will
shoulder many responsibilities; not because he is black, but
because he will hold a lofty office.
   ---
   Mr. Robbins is a historian in Ayer, Mass.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

