
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911016-0124
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911016-0124.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Battle Scars:
   Confirmation Ordeal
   May Affect The Views
   Of Justice Thomas
   ---
   On That, Antagonists Agree;
   But Both Left and Right
   See Some Possible Gains
   ---
   Key Rulings Due This Term
   ----
   By Paul M. Barrett and Jill Abramson
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/16/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<NS>
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
SUPREME COURT (SUP)
</GV>
<RE>
GEORGIA (GA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- During a break in last Saturday's defiant
testimony from Clarence Thomas, Sen. Edward Kennedy remarked
on the bitter aftertaste that the experience would leave with
the nominee. "What if he gets on the court now?" the
Massachusetts Democrat asked. "What will he think about
Congress?"
   Yesterday evening, the Senate confirmed Judge Thomas by a
narrow 52 to 48 vote -- one of the closest in the history of
the court. After a hard-fought victory, however, an
unsettling question remains: How will the excruciating ordeal
of the past two weeks influence Judge Thomas's legal views
and decisions as an associate justice on the Supreme Court?
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Even if he hadn't gone through the agony of the past two
weeks, Judge Thomas would have been a crucial addition to the
court, which is closely divided on such extraordinarily
important issues as abortion, religious expression, and free
speech.
   But Judge Thomas's friends and foes agree that his
nationally televised trial by fire cannot fail to change him
as a jurist. In his own testimony, he said an assassin's
bullet would have been preferable to the public hearings over
allegations of sexual harassment. Moreover, at 43, he is a
relatively young man, and his confirmation hearings suggested
that his views on many central legal questions are in flux.
This recent traumatic experience is sure to affect his
thinking.
   Clint Bolick, vice president of the Institute for Justice
in Washington and a close friend of Judge Thomas, says that
the weekend hearings will deepen his sympathy for victims and
"will reconfirm his very strong belief in individual rights."
   But those who had qualms about Judge Thomas before Anita
Hill's accusations against him exploded in public worry that
the hearings will push him in a different direction. "He now
sees himself as the victim of some kind of left-wing
conspiracy," says Estelle Rogers, a Washington attorney. As a
result, she argues, Judge Thomas will be more likely to rule
against the interests of civil rights organizations and
women's groups that opposed him.
   Others are concerned that the Supreme Court as an
institution will be diminished for having Judge Thomas on the
bench, even though Prof. Hill's allegations of misconduct
were not proven. Conservative legal commentator Bruce Fein,
who had been a Thomas supporter, says the Senate should have
rejected the nominee because "the Supreme Court has got to be
an institution that's above suspicion. That's why Doug
Ginsburg was out. That's why Abe Fortas was out." (Judge
Ginsburg withdrew as a nominee to the court in 1987 after it
was revealed he had smoked marijuana as a law professor;
Justice Fortas resigned in 1969 in a financial scandal.)
   Legal experts all along the political spectrum believe the
rocky confirmation hearings will influence the judge's views
on a host of issues soon to be before the court. The charges
by Prof. Hill could hardly fail to influence his thinking on
a sexual harassment case that will be argued this fall. His
lingering anger toward women's groups could also affect his
thoughts on abortion -- the most controversial issue before
the court, and an issue on which Judge Thomas has said he has
no current view.
   His confrontation with Congress, as Sen. Kennedy fears,
could easily enough affect his view of cases involving the
separation of powers between the three branches of
government. The "high-tech lynching," as he called it, could
also make him less sympathetic to a free press in First
Amendment cases.
   On the other hand, liberals hope that his experience at
the hands of the Senate will have sensitized Judge Thomas to
the rights of people charged with wrongdoing. His contention
that he was wrongly accused could make him empathize with
those who protest their innocence.
   He should be able to survive his ordeal. Judge Thomas is
by no means the first Supreme Court appointee to have
weathered scandal. Others have, and then gone on to
distinguished careers on the high court. Shortly after
Justice Hugo Black's confirmation in 1937, for example, it
came to light that he had been a dues-paying member of the Ku
Klux Klan. Justice Black withstood a storm of criticism and
demands that he resign. He disowned his racist affiliations
and went on to become an influential liberal justice.
   The Thomas case, however, is unique in some respects. "We
have never had such sustained public scrutiny of such
sensitive private matters" involving a Supreme Court nominee,
observes Robert Katzmann, a political scientist at the
Brookings Institution. The cloud over Judge Thomas isn't
likely to dissipate quickly, especially because the Senate
was ultimately unable to determine whether he or his accuser
was telling the truth. As Judge Thomas helps decide
controversial cases over the years, the specter of Anita
Hill's lurid allegations will almost certainly be evident.
Nothing, he angrily told the Judiciary Committee, "can . . .
give me my good name back."
   Here's a look at issues on which legal experts think Judge
Thomas's thinking may be affected:
                                                                                                       

   SEXUAL HARASSMENT. The bitter battle over Judge Thomas's
treatment of Anita Hill has pushed a relatively obscure case
called Franklin vs. Gwinnett County (Ga.) into the limelight
because it involves sexual harassment. The case, expected to
be argued before the court later this year, centers on a
female high-school student who was forced by a male coach to
have sex with him. The question is, can the student sue the
county school system for damages under federal anti-bias law.
   The slightest utterance from Judge Thomas during this
argument is bound to be dissected and will be imbued with
special meaning. He might even be asked to recuse himself
from the case, though it's unlikely he would do so. "People
will certainly be looking at how he decides the case," says
Nancy Duff Campbell, co-president of the National Women's Law
Center, which has filed a friend-of-the-court brief in the
case.
   Some believe that lingering bitterness over Anita Hill's
charges may prejudice him. "What we've seen is that Thomas
would be biased against claims made by those trying to
protect women's rights," says Dawn Johnsen, legal director of
the National Abortion Rights Action League.
   But Ms. Campbell is hopeful that Judge Thomas will be
sympathetic to victims of such discrimination, in part to
rehabilitate his reputation. "We hope this was an educational
experience and that he'll be molded in a way to be more
sensitive," she says.
   Judge Thomas may get a boost in this effort from the
politically attuned Chief Justice William Rehnquist. "I
wouldn't be surprised to see the chief justice give him
opinions to write on certain topics, like sex discrimination,
specifically to try to dispel any bad image," says Yale
Kamisar, a constitutional law professor at the University of
Michigan.
   During the hearing, Judge Thomas made plain his abhorrence
of sexual harassment. "I have adamantly condemned sex
harassment," he told the Judiciary panel. "There is no member
of this committee or the Senate who feels stronger about sex
harassment than I do." As chairman of the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, Mr. Thomas said, he took swift action
against EEOC officials who were found to have engaged in
sexual harassment.
                                                                                                       

   ABORTION. The issue that dominated the first round of
Judge Thomas's hearings last month, was abortion-the most
contentious issue before the court. Democrats questioned
Judge Thomas's credibility when he insisted not only that he
didn't have an opinion on Roe vs. Wade, the abortion-rights
landmark Supreme Court decision, but also that he had never
discussed the 1973 case.
   Women's rights organizations fear that Judge Thomas's
animosity toward liberal interest groups will influence his
decisions on reproductive rights. Judge Thomas angrily told
the committee that interest groups "came up with this story
{Hill's charges} and used this process to destroy me."
Claudia Withers of the Women's Legal Defense Fund says that
such expressions of hostility by Judge Thomas "give us the
concern that he wouldn't look favorably on claims" by
interest groups that advocate abortion rights before the
Supreme Court and that also opposed his nomination.
   The Supreme Court is scheduled to hear arguments today in
a case involving women's ability to get court orders to break
up the sort of anti-abortion blockades that roiled Wichita,
Kan., in the summer. Judge Thomas wouldn't be able to vote on
the case unless the Supreme Court asks the parties to reargue
it once he is on the bench.
   But a number of cases presenting an opportunity to
overrule the Roe vs. Wade decision are working their way
through the lower courts, and the justices are expected to
hear at least one of them next term. In the intervening
months, abortion-rights advocates worry that Judge Thomas's
bitterness toward them will harden and push him into an
anti-Roe majority on the court.
                                                                                                       

   SEPARATION OF POWERS. One legal expert who knows Judge
Thomas well is convinced that the new justice will be very
negative about any issue enhancing congressional powers. Even
before the experience of the past week, he probably would
have fallen under the influence of Justice Antonin Scalia, a
staunch foe of expanding congressional powers. That alliance
will be fortified now.
   "Congress," Judge Thomas told the conservative Federalist
Society in 1988, "is out of control." The Senate Judiciary
Committee's performance can only have reinforced this low
opinion of the legislative branch. He called the hearings
"sick" and "Kafkaesque."
   Judge Thomas has for a number of years allied himself with
conservative legal thinkers, led by Justice Scalia, who trace
many of the government's ills to congressional overreaching.
He called the 1988 Supreme Court decision on the
constitutionality of the independent counsel law "the most
important case" since Brown vs. Board of Education. Judge
Thomas endorsed the lone dissenter in the case, Justice
Scalia, who argued that Congress lacked the authority to set
up a special prosecutor's office to investigate alleged
wrongdoing by powerful federal officials. Judge Thomas
asserted that Justice Rehnquist, who wrote the majority
opinion upholding Congress's action, "failed not only
conservatives but all Americans."
                                                                                                       

   PRESS. In his opening salvo against the Judiciary
Committee and other foes, Judge Thomas recounted with disgust
the worst parts of his ordeal, describing "reporters sneaking
into my garage to examine books that I read, reporters and
interest groups swarming over divorce papers, looking for
dirt."
   Armstrong Williams, a Thomas friend and former aide,
reports that the judge in part blames the media for his
troubles. "The media took the whole thing and sensationalized
it, promoted false charges, just like the Tawana Brawley
case," Mr. Williams says.
   There are no cases involving press freedoms on the court's
docket and Judge Thomas has had very limited First Amendment
experience, a gap that gave the American Bar Association
reservations about the nominee. Surely, though, the past 10
days haven't made him any fan of the media.
   And, in all probability, reporters will continue their
digging into Judge Thomas's past in an effort to get to the
bottom of Anita Hill's charges. "There's a Pulitzer Prize out
there waiting for any reporter who solves this mystery,"
observes Susan Estrich, a law professor at the University of
Southern California, who helped run Gov. Michael Dukakis's
campaign for the presidency in 1988.
   Once confirmed, a Supreme Court justice "probably can't"
be impeached for past infractions, such as lying to Congress
or committing sexual harassment, says Laurence Tribe of
Harvard Law School. The Constitution says justices may serve
as long as they maintain "good behavior," and that is
generally understood to mean good behavior after they take
the oath, according to Prof. Tribe. That question remains a
murky one, however, because it hasn't been squarely
addressed.
                                                                                                       

   RIGHTS OF ACCUSED. In one of the more bizarre colloquies
of the Judiciary Committee spectacle, Democratic Sen. Dennis
DeConcini of Arizona, a member of the ethically tarnished
"Keating Five," commiserated with Judge Thomas about being
pilloried. Although he didn't return the sympathy, Judge
Thomas did say that "on matters such as privacy, matters such
as procedures for charges against individuals in the criminal
context . . . this has heightened my awareness of the
importance of those protections."
   Judge Thomas gave earlier hints that on protection of
criminals' rights he might surprise his conservative backers.
In the first phase of the hearings in September, Judge Thomas
spoke of watching from his appeals court office the bus loads
of black prisoners and thinking, "There but for the grace of
God go I."
   Being under the glare of the interrogators' spotlight
"could open his eyes, sure," says Michigan Prof. Kamisar.
   Judge Thomas will have an opportunity to apply his
criminal-law views in the case of Jacobson vs. U.S., which is
scheduled to be argued next month. Government agents used
three undercover operations over 29 months to send mailings
from phony pornography publishers to Nebraska farmer Keith
Jacobson. He eventually agreed to receive a magazine
depicting sexual acts between teen-age boys, and he was
prosecuted. Mr. Jacobson contends he wouldn't have bought the
magazine were it not for the government trap.
   In the end, some critics of Judge Thomas worry that his
recent experiences will send him onto the court as an
embittered man bent on revenge against his perceived
tormentors. "This is a dangerous way to send someone to the
Supreme Court, feeling as victimized as he does," says Ms.
Rogers, the Washington attorney.
   But John Danforth, Judge Thomas's most passionate defender
in the Senate, says going through the "agonies of hell" has
made Clarence Thomas "more sensitive to civil rights, to the
necessity of legal protection of the people of this country,
than most people who could conceivably be nominated for the
Supreme Court."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

