
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911016-0126
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911016-0126.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
   The Turning of America
</HL>
<DATE>
10/16/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<IN>
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<NS>
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
SUPREME COURT (SUP)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   It could hardly have been more ironic to have the outcome
of Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court of the
United States turn on the truth of one incident between a man
and a woman 10 years ago. The real battle was always
incomparably larger. The real battle was joined four years
ago with the nomination of Robert Bork. To Clarence Thomas
goes the victory that Robert Bork was denied. It's not
possible to understand what we've been through the past week
without remembering that earlier struggle.
   In "The Tempting of America," his account of the issues
that drove the order of battle in his confirmation fight,
Judge Bork wrote: "Because of my writings I had become
perhaps the most visible proponent of adhering to what the
Constitution actually says and of pointing out that where the
Constitution is silent, the people must decide through
legislation. That view is anathema to liberals who have come
to view the courts as the branch that will enact their
policies when legislatures won't. Quite aside from the effect
of my vote on the Court, I was a symbol that they needed to
destroy."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Excepting the differences one would expect among
independent thinkers, Clarence Thomas and Robert Bork are cut
from the same judicial cloth. And so he too was a symbol that
had to be destroyed.
   The attack on Clarence Thomas, which boggled tens of
millions of viewing Americans, makes sense only if one
understands that the roots of the struggle extend back to
1980 and Ronald Reagan's election to the presidency. One of
the most persistent arguments of those who opposed the Reagan
era was that it was a fluke, that he was simply not elected
President because people agreed with his conservative
political philosophy. Believing this to be true, opponents of
the Reagan presidency then argued that his nomination of the
like-minded Judge Bork was also illegitimate. As they put it,
"out of the mainstream."
   We have argued continuously during these years that this
argument was false, that the voters had indeed entrusted
Ronald Reagan with a mandate (his campaign positions were
clear) and that the losing side was trying to overturn the
results of these elections.
   With the televised Thomas hearings we have in effect just
held another national election. And the public, by every
measure available, gave Judge Thomas what in a normal
election would be called their landslide support.
   This doesn't mean that the American people support Judge
Thomas -- or Robert Bork or Ronald Reagan -- in every detail
of their political beliefs. It is likely even that on the
abortion issue, most voters are essentially pro-choice. We
don't doubt, however, that in terms of the presidency or the
Supreme Court, voters are willing to risk disappointment on
discrete issues if they approve the fundamental direction.
They have now given their consent in three successive
presidential elections to a direction that can fairly be
called conservative. The Supreme Court nominations of George
Bush comport with those results.
   The difference, however, between the American people and
the permanent political establishment in Washington is that
Washington no longer feels constrained by the American
political system. It won't wait for the next election, nor --
more importantly -- will it make the effort to persuade the
electorate to support its views of Supreme Court nominations.
   They'd rather fight their battles inside the Beltway,
which lets them operate free of input from this nation's huge
electorate. They can't possibly have wanted the sexual
harassment charge against Clarence Thomas to go before the
entire American population. It did, and they were undone by a
system that they made.
   That system has depended crucially on the support of an
ideologically compliant Washington press corps, which would
normally render a target politically controversial and, in a
risk-averse town, untouchable. Cut off from their support
base, Judge Bork, Ed Meese, Oliver North and others have been
left bleeding on the Washington fields. With Judge Thomas,
however, the system ran out of control.
   Washington's reporters, who had already largely broken
away from the editorial controls of traditional journalism,
even broke away from the congressional staffs and
special-interest groups, building the sexual harassment story
into a bonfire of personal and political grievances. They
seemed to be demanding a national referendum on sexual
harassment, meaning a Senate vote for the accuser, and
instead the whole nation showed up and a big majority voted
the other way -- to support Clarence Thomas. Perhaps the
voters felt they couldn't trust Washington or Congress with
something important.
   Now, with Clarence Thomas heading for the Court and the
voters going back to their daily lives, what has been
learned?
   The Democratic Party has to decide whether its future lies
with the world view of the special-interest groups and
anonymous congressional staff, or with people such as Bill
Clinton, Doug Wilder, Paul Tsongas and others, mostly
beyond-the-Beltway governors, trying to conform the party's
historic ideals to the temper of the modern electorate.
   The congressional and White House Republicans should have
learned that in a period of divided government, they can only
win, as here, by abandoning their traditional passivity in
favor of going on the offensive, and without apology.
   Black Americans have perhaps the greatest sorting out to
do. The bonfire illuminated the existence of an impressive,
moderate black middleclass. If there is a group of true
political independents in this country, they are it. It looks
as if they have a lot to say to Democrats, Republicans and
white feminists. They should stick around and keep talking.
   As for Clarence Thomas, we don't agree that he joins the
Court in a damaged state. This country is in the middle of a
historic political turning. There was no reason to expect
that the overturning of the old order would be quiet or easy.
But history will note that at the moment Clarence Thomas was
about to be destroyed by the old order, the American people
came forward and by the millions confirmed his appointment to
the Supreme Court. It looks to us as if Clarence Thomas is
the first Justice to sit on the U.S. Supreme Court with a
popular mandate.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

