
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911011-0071
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911011-0071.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   The Showdown:
   Thomas and Senators
   Face Risky Decisions
   At Dramatic Hearing
   ---
   Should Nominee Stand Fast?
   Should Biden Be Tough?
   How Far Should Bush Go?
   ---
   A New Accuser Steps Forward
   ----
   By David Shribman and Michel McQueen
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/11/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
SUPREME COURT (SUP)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- This is the moment of truth.
   In an episode of high drama, Judge Clarence Thomas, who
was only hours away from winning a lifetime seat on the
Supreme Court, and Anita Hill, who says he made her a victim
of sexual harassment, begin to tell their versions of the
story this morning before the Senate Judiciary Committee and
an audience of millions.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The proceedings will be carried live on ABC, NBC, CBS,
CNN, public television and cable outlets. Heightening the
tension were allegations from a second accuser, a former
Thomas aide named Angela Wright, that he engaged in what she
termed "annoying and obnoxious" behavior, including
pressuring her for dates and making inappropriate comments.
   Given the focused, explosive nature of the hearing, this
is destined to be one of the most dramatic days in Washington
in recent memory.
   In the narrowest sense, Judge Thomas and Ms. Hill are
staking their own reputations, personal credibility and
careers on this session. But they are also surrogates in a
far larger struggle. The outcome of this hearing will affect
the personal and political reputations of lawmakers, interest
groups, President Bush and the White House political
apparatus -- as well as informal and heated conversations
throughout a riveted nation.
   "Right now the emotions are running higher than I can
remember, with the best-laid plans being upset everywhere,"
says Thomas Mann, director of governmental studies at the
Brookings Institution. "Washington and Congress are under
siege, and the whole world is watching. Clarence Thomas and
Anita Hill are not the only public figures on trial."
   The players in today's drama could pursue a number of
strategies, each with enormous risks:
                                                                                                       

   Clarence Thomas
                                                                                                       

   Judge Thomas has to answer whether he dated, or tried to
date, Ms. Hill. He also must answer whether he continued to
press her despite repeated refusals. The nominee told Senate
supporters as late as Wednesday night that he never even
asked her out. But his affidavit denying her general charges
doesn't answer that conclusively.
   Judge Thomas also has to convince the lawmakers -- and the
public, watching at home or offices -- that he did nothing to
give the appearance that he was harassing her on sexual
matters or was using his position as her boss to create an
atmosphere of discomfort.
   He and his supporters must decide if he'll be more
credible if he gives an inch or stands firm. He could argue
that he may have said something improper and he's sorry; that
he did approach Ms. Hill socially but did not persist; or
that he simply never did anything that could even be
misunderstood. He'll probably take the last course, arguing
that he made neither social nor sexual advances to Ms. Hill,
and certainly did not press upon her either his sexual
interests or accounts of pornographic materials.
   He and the witnesses called to support him will portray
him as a man with a formal business style and an almost
prudish approach to work-place relationships. He will face
the hearings with the brand of confidence that left those he
spoke to this week, in the words of William Kristol, Vice
President Quayle's chief of staff, "absolutely convinced he
is telling the truth."
   The key to Judge Thomas's success or failure largely rests
with him alone, says Sen. Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, the only
Republican woman in the Senate and a probable Thomas
supporter. "Clarence Thomas has to personally address these
issues with a conviction and purposefulness that will resolve
these questions," she says.
                                                                                                       

   Anita Hill
                                                                                                       

   The University of Oklahoma law professor began this with
confidential allegations that Judge Thomas had subjected her
to sexual harassment when she served as his personal
assistant at the Education Department. How will she explain
why she continued to work for Judge Thomas after the
purported incidents -- and especially why she followed him to
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission from their
previous jobs?
   "If you listen to her carefully, no one can believe that
woman is attempting to smear this man," says Roger Wilkins, a
Thomas opponent and former Johnson administration official
who now teaches at Virginia's George Mason University. "She
is a very credible human being."
   She has also been instantly transformed into a symbol by
women's groups and liberal activists who wanted to defeat
Judge Thomas's nomination long before these charges were
aired.
   The witnesses Judge Thomas has summoned on his behalf will
seek to pick her story apart, citing telephone log comments
indicating that Ms. Hill "just called to say hello" or "needs
your advice on getting research grants" or "wanted to
congratulate on marriage." Ms. Hill will need to convincingly
explain or refute those messages, as well as reports that
have Judge Thomas, for example, helping her land a job on the
law faculty at Oral Roberts University.
   And Ms. Hill will also be asked why she didn't broach her
sexual-harassment charges in confirmation hearings for
earlier posts that Judge Thomas won.
   Ms. Hill will have to defend her own credibility
forcefully. But if she appears strident, she may play into
the hands of those who claim she's simply trying to derail
the nomination.
                                                                                                       

   President Bush
                                                                                                       

   The president who nominated Judge Thomas has to battle for
his nominee, of course, but how does he do that without
wading into the underlying issue of sexual harassment?
   Although the president has selected a record number of
women for appointive federal posts, none of his most
important political or policy advisers are women. Only two of
his 14 most senior White House officials are women.
   Some argue that Mr. Bush would do better to lose the
battle -- the nomination of Thomas -- than win the battle and
lose a much bigger war. In his zeal to defend his nominee, he
already has opened himself to criticism that he lacks
sufficient sensitivity to the difficulties women face in the
work force.
   Presidential advisers are counseling Mr. Bush to stay away
from the dispute over whether Judge Thomas is guilty of the
charges of sexual harassment. But Mr. Bush, who is preparing
for his re-election campaign, doesn't want to lose perhaps
the most emotional confirmation battle in decades. He is
walking a thin line.
   "One fairly obvious consequence is that he is going to
have to, in some way and at some point, acknowledge this
issue," says Ruth Mandel, professor at the Eagleton Institute
of Politics at Rutgers University. "If he doesn't acknowledge
it and address it, it's going to come up in the 1992
campaign."
                                                                                                       

   Sen. Joseph Biden
                                                                                                       

   The chairman of the Judiciary Committee, Mr. Biden is
being accused of not treating these charges seriously enough.
The Delaware Democrat has to perform a tremendous high-wire
act: On the one hand, he has to be sensitive enough to Ms.
Hill to show that he cares about the issue of sexual
harassment. On the other hand -- as the chairman of a
committee that began the downfall of Reagan Supreme Court
nominee Robert Bork -- he must be tough enough on Ms. Hill to
show that he's being fair to the nominee.
   Mr. Biden knows that members of the committee have had, as
political scientist Robert Starks puts it, "egg on their
faces" for days, answering charges about why they didn't
investigate further when they had at least some information
about Ms. Hill's charges as early as July. The criticism
comes in the wake of continuing dissatisfaction with the
confirmation process from both sides of the ideological
divide, with each side accusing the other of politicizing the
process.
   Mr. Biden has told associates that he regards this episode
as a "terribly ugly chapter on Capitol Hill," and will seek
in the televised hearings that begin this morning to reclaim
the high ground for Congress. But how can he do that in this
atmosphere of recrimination? He also faces the likelihood of
a Republican-generated investigation of how Ms. Hill's
charges leaked to the public. (The committee, which had
deadlocked 7-7 on the nomination, won't take a new vote; the
Senate vote is scheduled for Tuesday.)
                                                                                                       

   The Democratic questioners
                                                                                                       

   The Democrats will have to look as if they're trying to
get the truth -- not as if they're trying to get Judge
Thomas. It won't be easy.
   Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont is a former prosecutor who
seemed to have disbelieved much of what Judge Thomas said in
his hearings. He is already on record as criticizing the
nominee for fleeing from his record, arguing that Judge
Thomas "jettisoned one public statement after another like a
captain trying to keep his ship afloat." Mr. Leahy has
complained that Judge Thomas's advisers counseled him to
"play it safe," and that the tactic "did not fulfill Judge
Thomas's responsibility to the nation."
   Sen. Howell Heflin, a former chief justice of the Alabama
Supreme Court, is a conservative Democrat who waffled on the
Thomas nomination and then opposed it, criticizing the
nominee's evasiveness and suggesting he might be a right-wing
ideologue. His role in today's hearing is likely to be that
of the elder jurist; he might be regarded as something of a
barometer for other southern Democrats.
                                                                                                       

   The Republican questioners
                                                                                                       

   They want to support Judge Thomas without appearing to be
winking at sexual harassment.
   Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah, who in the earlier hearings
assumed the role of Thomas defender, will be an energetic
champion. And though questions of sexual propriety weigh
heavily on Mr. Hatch, who has a reputation for being
strait-laced, he can be expected to question Ms. Hill
aggressively and to be an assertive advocate of Judge Thomas.
   Sen. Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, like Mr. Leahy a
former prosecutor, has already spoken to Judge Thomas about
Ms. Hill's charges. The nominee denied all the charges to
him; Sen. Specter will want to be sure that Judge Thomas
didn't lie to him. Aggressive and combative, Mr. Specter will
follow the story wherever it leads him, and Republicans know
that he is not necessarily a GOP team player. He voted
against Judge Bork but for David Souter, and supported Judge
Thomas in the committee vote.
   Sen. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, the senior
committee member, is an administration hard-liner. He is
likely to deplore sexual harassment but ask why Ms. Hill
waited to come forward.
                                                                                                       

   The Thomas handlers
                                                                                                       

   Although the White House is arguing that Judge Thomas is
preparing his defense himself, the team that prepped the
nominee for his hearings is under enormous pressure to redeem
itself and salvage the situation.
   The handlers, led by corporate lobbyist and former White
House chief of staff Kenneth Duberstein, calculated that the
harassment report could be kept confidential, and didn't
press Judiciary Chairman Biden either to dismiss the
allegations or to deal with them. The group's strategy was to
portray Judge Thomas as a person of extraordinary character,
playing down questions of his experience and scholarship, and
they didn't anticipate an attack on what they regarded his
strongest flank.
   Moreover, the group's strategy of having Judge Thomas be
as general and evasive as possible during the hearings --
insisting at one point that he had no opinion on the Supreme
Court's landmark abortion ruling -- created a credibility
problem that has haunted the nomination. Concerns about Judge
Thomas's forthrightness cost him some votes he might
otherwise have won -- and left him more vulnerable when the
sexual-harassment issue erupted. Now, the handlers are paying
the price.
   "The horrible problem here is that there is no way to
handle this," says a Republican familiar with the nomination
process.
                                                                                                       

   The anti-Thomas groups
                                                                                                       

   For now at least, the activists who opposed Judge Thomas's
confirmation are riding high, having already scored a victory
by delaying the nomination.
   A number of liberal activist groups, especially the
Alliance for Justice, People for the American Way and the
Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, have emerged as the
stealth bombers of confirmation hearings, working more
feverishly than even members of the Judiciary Committee
staff. These groups' influence first was felt during the
nomination of William Rehnquist to be chief justice and
intensified during the Bork confirmation fight, as they
developed into a tightly knit network.
   "The public wants to have the full record placed before it
and the U.S. Senate," says Nan Aron, director of the Alliance
for Justice.
   The groups and their supporters argue that they provide
invaluable research assistance and are a magnet for
information about nominees. But opponents of the
organizations believe, in the words of Alan Slobodin,
president and general counsel of the Washington Legal
Foundation's legal studies division, that they "will stop at
nothing to defeat a nominee."
   If the effort against Judge Thomas fizzles and the
organizations are seen to have grossly overreached, their
credibility will be badly damaged in any future battles.
   Civil-rights groups that have opposed Judge Thomas are in
an especially awkward position. On the one hand, says Ronald
Walters, chairman of the political science department at
Howard University, their objectives "are going to be served
by this hearing because regardless of the outcome it's going
to damage the credibility of the nominee." But the groups
could also lose by winning: They know that if Judge Thomas
performs poorly today and is defeated, it is unlikely the
president will nominate another black jurist.
   ---
   Jeffrey H. Birnbaum contributed to this article.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

