
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ900718-0065
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
900718-0065.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Neil Bush, Despite Applying `Smith Smell Test,'
   Gets Compared With Billy Carter, Donald Nixon
   ----
   By Timothy Noah
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/18/90
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<CO>
   F
</CO>
<IN>
SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
</IN>
<GV>
TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)
</GV>
<LP>
   DENVER -- Neil Bush calls it the Smith Smell Test.
   "People call up and say, `Hey Neil, I've got this great
deal,'" says the president's embattled but still amiable son.
"The smell test is: If my name were Neil Smith, would they be
asking me to engage in this venture with them?"
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Mr. Bush says he's never violated his smell test by
trading on being George Bush's son. But with the spotlight on
his role in the collapse of Silverado Banking, Savings &amp; Loan
Association, which is expected to cost taxpayers $1 billion,
comparisons inevitably are made with Billy Carter, Donald
Nixon and other presidential relatives whose finances brought
embarrassment to the White House. As a former Silverado
director, Mr. Bush has come under fire for overseeing loans
that involved two investors in his oil company.
   But what has caught public attention is a $100,000 loan
that Mr. Bush received before joining the Silverado board
from Kenneth Good, a Denver real-estate developer and
investor in JNB Exploration, Mr. Bush's oil company. Mr. Good
arranged to invest the money in the commodities market on Mr.
Bush's behalf, with the understanding that any profits would
be Mr. Bush's, while any losses would be absorbed by Mr.
Good.
   Mr. Bush, who not only looks but also acts like the Jimmy
Stewart of "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington," made headlines by
conceding in congressional testimony that the Good loan
sounded "a little fishy."
   Mr. Bush's friends say he lacks a sophisticated
understanding of the darker forces in life. "I think there's
a refreshing naivete about Neil," says Mr. Bush's adviser,
former Democratic Rep. Thomas Ashley, who's known George Bush
since his Skull and Bones days at Yale. "He's not jaded."
   Since Neil Bush's youth, when he was afflicted with
dyslexia -- his brother Marvin recalls that "homework would
take him a little bit longer" than the other Bush children --
he has been known for his good-natured willingness to pitch
into any task. While his siblings would scatter when their
parents ordered that yard work be done, recalls Marvin Bush,
"Neil would step up and say, `Yeah, great.'"
   Friends and business associates agree that Neil Bush's
family name lent him a certain aura within the Denver
business community when he settled there after working on his
father's 1980 presidential bid. Mr. Bush put in two years at
Amoco Corp. to learn the oil business, then left that
$30,000-a-year job to start an oil-exploration company of his
own. Investors were drawn to Mr. Bush "partly, I suppose,
because he was the son of the vice president," concedes Evans
Nash, Neil Bush's former partner. "I'm sure that helped him
meet people."
   Even Mr. Bush's lawyer concedes that being George Bush's
son raised Neil's profile in Denver. "We don't have a lot of
celebrities," explains attorney James Nesland. "We had Marvin
Davis for a while. Now he's gone," he says, registering that
oil man's departure for Hollywood with a shrug.
   Settled in Denver, Neil Bush became a fixture on the local
political scene, giving speeches at Lincoln Day dinners and
stumping for his father and a variety of local Republican
candidates. "He's an enthusiastic speaker," notes Bruce
Benson, chairman of the Colorado Republican Party. "He speaks
of good Republican values."
   Neil Bush can be startlingly blunt in enunciating
conservative themes. According to one local news account, Mr.
Bush told a group of Hispanic voters in 1988 that welfare was
"worse than slavery."
   Mr. Bush also settled into Denver's social elite. With his
wife, Sharon, and three children, he lived in suburban
seclusion amid rolling greens and humming golf carts inside a
walled country-club development. The handsome young couple
became a fixture at dinner parties and charity events.
   It was at one such party in 1985 that Neil Bush met
Michael Wise, chairman of Silverado. Mr. Wise was seeking a
new director for Silverado's board -- preferably someone
young, because the board was top-heavy with older members,
and preferably someone with experience in the oil business,
which was underrepresented. Mr. Bush accepted. "I considered
it a chance to learn," he later told the Denver Post.
   With no experience in banking, Mr. Bush, then 30 years
old, nevertheless seemed a logical choice to those close to
Mr. Wise. "Mike Wise seemed to like to be a first-class
dresser," observes Alexander Walter, a former loan-portfolio
manager at Silverado. "His automobile was always impeccably
clean." Neil Bush, Mr. Walter implies, was another such
ornament.
   Mr. Wise declined to return calls, and through an
intermediary referred all inquiries to his lawyer, Bettina
Lawton. Ms. Lawton says Mr. Bush's last name was "certainly
not a primary consideration" when Mr. Wise chose him for the
board.
   Despite Mr. Bush's youth and inexperience in banking
matters, former Silverado officials say Mr. Bush was no less
able a board member than the others. According to Mr. Walter,
most had "no hands-on experience" with the complex
Silverado's business. Former Silverado board member Diane
Ingels says Mr. Bush was a "very diligent" director who "met
with other directors and with management to enhance his
understanding."
   Still, Mr. Bush remains defensive about his qualifications
to sit on Silverado's board. Sitting in his office
overlooking downtown Denver, a small bust of his father
behind him, he lurches unprompted from discussing his work on
a political campaign into a defense of his work on
Silverado's board. "I was just as well prepared to be on that
board as anyone," he protests.
   Mr. Bush is also emphatic in denying that Mr. Good's
risk-free loan violated the Smith Smell Test. "It's just his
way of having fun," Mr. Bush says. "I wasn't going to deny
him his chance of having fun."
   Mr. Bush says Mr. Good set up similar accounts for Mr.
Good's secretary and bookkeeper. Mr. Good couldn't be reached
for comment, but in testimony last month before the House
Banking Committee, he described the loans as "a means of
attracting and keeping loyal business associates." Still,
neither of Mr. Bush's two partners at JNB Exploration
received such loans. Mr. Bush says they weren't as close to
Mr. Good. The money was eventually lost when the commodities
investments went sour.
   Meanwhile, Mr. Bush is wrestling against
conflict-of-interest charges by the federal Office of Thrift
Supervision concerning his service on the Silverado board.
The thrift office has charged that as a Silverado director
Mr. Bush voted on loans to William Walters, a Denver real
estate agent who was one of two original investors in JNB
Exploration. Mr. Bush answers that there wasn't any legal
requirement that he abstain from the votes.
   The thrift office also contends that Mr. Bush failed to
properly disclose his interest when he helped Mr. Good
receive a $900,000 line of credit from Silverado in order to
assist an Argentine project involving JNB Exploration. But
Mr. Bush produced a memo that appears to demonstrate that his
interest was disclosed to the board before it approved the
line of credit. These and other charges will be publicly
aired at administrative hearings to be held this September in
Denver.
   Amid everything, Mr. Bush maintains a self-deprecating
wit. He has "no airs or graces about him," observes
Republican political consultant Peter Teeley, who recently
phoned Mr. Bush to offer advice and support. Mr. Nesland, the
lawyer, says that after he scolded Mr. Bush for his "fishy"
gaffe, Mr. Bush clipped a newspaper photograph of himself at
the hearing, with Mr. Nesland and Sharon Bush sitting behind
him. "I can't believe he said that," Mr. Bush scribbled in a
bubble drawn above Mr. Nesland's head, according to Mr.
Nesland. "Oh no, not again," Mr. Bush wrote in another bubble
above his wife.
   Indeed, Mr. Bush's spirits are sufficiently buoyant that,
in the midst of seeing himself portrayed as a major S&amp;L
villain, he can still envision pursuing a career in politics.
Ten years from now, he muses, "I may be a U.S. senator. Who
knows?"
</TEXT>
</DOC>

