
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT922-1115</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CFXBMAD4FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920624
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  24 JUN 92 / MGN threatens legal action over transfers: Maxwell chief
named over Pounds 180m 'unusual' transactions; Annual report reveals
extraordinary losses of Pounds 421.5m
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW JACK
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
MR MICHAEL STONEY, a senior executive in a number of Maxwell companies, is
named as one of three people primarily responsible for more than Pounds 180m
of 'unusual' payments from Mirror Group Newspapers bank accounts during the
last financial year, according to the chairman's statement released with MGN
accounts yesterday.
Mr Kevin Maxwell and Mr Ian Maxwell, two sons of the late Robert Maxwell,
are named as the other two people most involved in these transactions. Mr
Kevin Maxwell and Mr Stoney refused to provide MGN with information, the
statement says.
Sir Robert Clark, chairman of MGN, lists a series of transactions - some of
which he stresses may have been perfectly legitimate - that took place in
the past few months.
He says legal action may be taken against a number of organisations,
including Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank, over more than Pounds 40m
in transfers from MGN if the bank was aware that they were 'effected for
improper purposes'.
Notes to the accounts show that MGN made extraordinary provisions of Pounds
421.5m in the year to December 29 1991, including Pounds 208.6m in pension
deficiencies and Pounds 122.4m in transactions with Maxwell-controlled
companies.
Sir Robert says that during the year there were at least 28 'unusual'
payments for more than Pounds 1m from the group's bank accounts, making a
total of more than Pounds 180m. 'Some may well ultimately be established to
have arisen under legitimate transactions.'
Nine of the payments were authorised solely by Robert Maxwell. The others
were authorised mainly by Mr Kevin Maxwell, Mr Ian Maxwell and Mr Michael
Stoney, he says.
One transfer to Goldman Sachs was countersigned by Mr Ernest Burrington,
former managing director, at the request of Mr Kevin Maxwell on the reported
instruction of Robert Maxwell. Two authorisations were countersigned by Mr
Lawrence Guest, former MGN finance director.
Sir Robert says the MGN directors do not believe that either Mr Burrington
or Mr Guest knew there was anything improper about these payments.
With these exceptions, 'the independent directors . . . were not involved
in, and did not authorise or approve any of these payments,' he says.
Sir Robert says the group finance department accepted assurances from the
treasury department - which was headed by Mr Stoney - about 'the nature of
certain transactions' including payments to financial institutions which
were recorded as deposits.
'The treasury department arranged for it to appear that sums of interest had
been credited to the group in respect of those 'deposits',' he says.
In his report Sir Robert points to 'certain weaknesses' accepted by the MGN
board:
Internal controls and operating procedures which failed to identify related
party transactions and bring them to the attention of independent directors
for approval;
Bank mandates authorised by Robert Maxwell and Mr Stoney which permitted the
movement of group funds on the authority of Maxwell or directors who were
also directors of Maxwell-controlled companies;
The audit committee of non-executive directors, which might have reviewed
systems and mandates, but was not convened;
The finance department's inadequate authority to verify and record the
treasury department's activities.
The report details a Pounds 50m loan made by Bankers Trust in London last
October which appears to have been used to pay off a loan from Bankers Trust
in New York to Robert Maxwell Group, parent of the Maxwell private
interests,
Separately, the statement highlights three transfers of more than Pounds 40m
from MGN to Goldman Sachs - Pounds 11m of this was transferred on Robert
Maxwell's signature to pay for previous dealings in Maxwell Communication
Corporation stock. The balance was for foreign exchange trade exposures
incurred by Bishopsgate Investment Trust and Robert Maxwell Group, it says.
He says MGN is inquiring to see whether it can establish if Goldman Sachs
was 'aware or should have been aware' that the transfers 'had been effected
for improper purposes'. If so, he says 'it will be possible to seek orders
against them . . . for the sums paid.'
He says MGN is considering legal action against professional advisers in
relation to property leases, and hopes to recover money through claims on
insurance policies written on Robert Maxwell's life.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>
