
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT922-10715</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CD2BIAF3FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920429
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  29 APR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Zimbabwe counts cost of drought
 -Farm output is set to slump to a 30-year low
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By TONY HAWKINS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
As the summer draws to its close, Zimbabwe's farmers are counting the cost
of what for most of them is the worst drought they have ever experienced.
Over the country as a whole, rainfall has been less than half the seasonal
average; in many southern and eastern areas, it has been between a tenth and
a third of normal levels.
Crop production has been devastated, with the exception of drought-resistant
tobacco, where output has risen 6 per cent to 180m kg. Maize deliveries to
the state-owned grain marketing board will fall by 90 per cent this year to
60,000 tonnes, from more than 600,000 tonnes last year and an annual average
of more than 1m tonnes in the late 1980s.
Cotton deliveries are forecast at less than 90,000 tonnes, down from 205,000
tonnes in 1991, soyabeans at 30,000 tonnes (133,000 tonnes last year), while
winter wheat production is expected to fall to less than a third of normal
levels. In the low veld, where rains have been below normal since 1989,
sugar production has come to a halt, turning Zimbabwe from a substantial
exporter into a net importer.
At ZDollars 3.7bn (Pounds 410m) last year, agriculture accounted for almost
20 per cent of gross domestic product, though in real terms, it was 8 per
cent below the mid-1980s peak. Flue-cured tobacco accounts for just over
half of this, and while there is likely to be some modest growth in the
value of its output this year, the rest, with the exceptions of beef and
horticulture will fall catastrophically; so much so that, in real terms,
farm output in 1992 is projected to slump to its lowest levels for 30 years.
The impact on the economy will be devastating. Growth is forecast to decline
from 3.6 per cent last year to between minus 4 and minus 5 per cent in 1992.
Following last year's 45 per cent devaluation of the Zimbabwean dollar,
exports of farm produce in US dollar terms will be sharply lower, with
tobacco earnings of less than USDollars 500m, compared with Dollars 520m in
1991 (28 per cent of total exports). The collapse of sugar, cotton, and
maize exports and reduced foreign earnings from coffee and tea will cost the
country at least Dollars 150m (10 per cent of exports) over the next 12
months.
At the same time, the country will need to import at least Dollars 350m
worth of maize, wheat, sugar and possibly, later in the year, dairy
products.
After allowing for some reduction in other imports and higher exports of
manufactures and some minerals, the balance of payments impact will exceed
Dollars 300m  - at the very least  - pushing the current account deficit
above Dollars 1bn, or 20 per cent of GDP.
Financing this will be difficult given similar emergency food aid demands in
the region from Angola, Malawi, Mozambique and Zambia. The traditional
suppliers of maize to these countries  - South Africa and Zimbabwe  - will
be importing up to 7m tonnes themselves this year (5m tonnes for South
Africa and 2m tonnes for Zimbabwe).
Compensatory funding will be available from the International Monetary Fund,
but when this and other aid commitments are taken into account there is
certain to be an unfilled gap in the region, which for Zimbabwe will mean
diverting other aid funds and export earnings to pay for food.
Transport poses an even more formidable challenge than financing. The entire
southern African region will need an estimated 10m tonnes of food imports
this year. Zimbabwe's needs are put at about 2m tonnes of maize and 500,000
tonnes of wheat, sugar and other products, while Malawi will need at least
1m tonnes and Zambia more than 800,000 tonnes. The port of Beira in
Mozambique is expected to handle a minimum of 600,000 tonnes of this
traffic, while the Zambians expect to bring in some of their requirements
from the Tanzanian port of Dar es Salaam.
But the main burden will fall on South Africa, which has dedicated the ports
of Cape Town, Port Elizabeth and East London to regional food imports.
Initially, Spoornet, the South African railways, will run two liner trains
daily, each carrying 700 tonnes of food, though the frequency will increase
later. Zimbabwe's authorities will have to grapple with the problems either
of running the trains through to the main distribution centres, such as
Harare and Bulawayo, or transferring the maize to the Zimbabwe rail and road
systems at the Beit Bridge border.
While transport industry officials expect Spoornet to cope, there are doubts
as to the capacity of the regional systems in Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia
and, to a lesser degree, Zimbabwe.
In addition to its direct impact on agriculture, the drought will have
far-reaching consequences for the Zimbabwean economy. The reduced water flow
through the Kafue Gorge in neighbouring Zambia has forced Lusaka to suspend
electricity exports to Zimbabwe, which next month will impose a 20 per cent
electric power cut. This will have serious repercussions on mining and
manufacturing, with mining sources warning that output and exports could
fall by as a much as a fifth.
Some mines are also in difficulty because of the water situation, while
mineral exports could be jeopardised by transport congestion.
The country's textile and clothing industry  - the main exporter of
manufactured goods  - has warned of production cutbacks and lay-offs unless
it is allowed to import cotton this year. The banks, already under pressure
to contain lending as part of the government's on-off credit squeeze, will
be forced to carry farmers' overdrafts through until the 1993 harvest. Next
year's crop and livestock production will remain below average  - even if
good rains fall  - as early plantings will be reduced because of a lack of
irrigation. After a drought-induced surge this year caused by destocking,
beef production will fall sharply as cattlemen rebuild their herds. The
dairy sector, like maize, was in crisis before the drought, because of the
government's producer price policy, which has pushed farmers into export
crops (such as tobacco), horticulture and even game farming.
At best, it will take the industry until 1994-95 to regain average
production levels of the late 1980s, while the economy as a whole is
unlikely to recover fully from the drought of 1992 for at least two years.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 38
</PAGE>
</DOC>

