
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT921-2956</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CCQBDAC5FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920317
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Van Niekerk's Cape crusade to
rescue farmers - The South African agriculture minister is trying everything
to minimise bankruptcies / Farmer's Viewpoint
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID RICHARDSON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
LAST FRIDAY was the day of the annual agricultural show at Prieska in the
northern part of South Africa's Cape Province. A few score farmers and their
families from a radius of a about 100 km (62 miles) had gathered to wander
around about a dozen trade and craft stands, have a braai (barbecue) lunch
and to see which of them would be awarded the prize for the best Fat-Tailed
Persian sheep. The temperature was in the mid-40s centigrade (about 120 deg
F).
This is virtually desert country where a farmer needs several thousand
hectares and a drought- and heat-resistant breed of sheep to make a
reasonable living. It lies between the Great Karoo in the south and the
Kalahari in the north and the town owes its existence and past wealth to the
mining of blue asbestos and copper from the nearby hills.
Now the copper mine is worked out and the lung disease asbestosis has killed
the demand for the asbestos the area once produced. Today Prieska relies
almost entirely on agriculture and in both prosperity and population it is
only half the town it once was.
But the mood at the show was jovial and relaxed. The quality of the sheep
entered for the competition was excellent, the food was good and the local
MP was among the small crowd. They know him well; for not only is he a
neighbouring farmer (his farm is just 170 km away by dirt road and that
qualifies as 'neighbour' in this vast hot countryside) but he is also South
Africa's minister of agriculture.
Mr Kraai van Niekerk would probably have attended the show as a farmer in
any case but last week he was campaigning for today's referendum on
continued political reform in South Africa, and Prieska is the centre of his
constituency. He had delivered a speech at another town that morning; now he
was pressing the flesh of his fellow farmers before addressing a house
meeting in the late afternoon and another in the local town hall in the
evening. In the sweltering heat it was a punishing schedule.
If the voters reject continued reform Mr van Niekerk, along with the rest of
the cabinet, will begin preparations to resign. But if the majority of South
Africa's white electorate votes against calls by the Conservative Party and
the AWB for a return to old ways, the minister will be able to return to
other pressing problems in his department.
Chief among these is the extended drought which has affected a significant
proportion of the Republic. Indeed, I had expected that the arid area in
which the minister's own farm is situated would be suffering most. But I was
wrong.
When I went with him to his 13,000-hectare holding, which has an annual
rainfall of just 6 inches and where temperatures in the high 30s and low 40s
centigrade are normal throughout the long summer, he explained that the
secret of success on such dry bush veldt was to restrict stocking rates (he
runs only one Merino wool sheep per 10 hectares) and to conserve what little
moisture was available.
This meant moving each 300-head flock on a regular basis from one
100-hectare camp (pasture) to another so as not to destroy the indigenous
grasses and bushes sprouting from the sandy, rocky terrain and which,
incredibly to my unaccustomed eye, sustained the animals in good condition.
He talked with enthusiasm and detailed knowledge about the balance of
nature. And he claimed that it was not farmers like him, who were used to
managing in dry weather, who were in financial trouble.
It is, in fact, the arable farmers further east who are suffering most, as I
had seen and heard for myself a few days earlier, and Mr van Niekerk has
already set up committees of bankers, extension officers and local farmers'
representatives, to try to find ways to avoid many of them going bankrupt.
Aid schemes are being worked out, wherever possible, to write off some debt
and to re-schedule the rest, often at subsidised interest rates. But in many
cases the financial position is such that the farmer is beyond help.
Critics of the rescue attempts allege that most of the farmers who are in
trouble are financially illiterate and that they are reaping the results of
unbridled expenditure and expansion in the boom years of the 1970s and
1980s. Mr van Niekerk concedes that such suggestions contain an element of
truth But the drought is also an established fact and there are
socio-economic as well as agricultural reasons why as many farmers as
possible should be saved.
To allow vast numbers of farms to go out of business at a time when there is
little enthusiasm, even among successful farmers for expansion, would put
tens of thousands of black farm labourers out of work. Since the repeal of
the Group Areas Act two years ago there has already been enormous growth in
the squatter camps around big towns. Hordes of unemployed farm workers would
add to an already serious problem.
There is also the immediate problem of ensuring the availability of
sufficient food. South Africa consumes between 6m and 7m tonnes of maize
each year. Production from this year's drought stricken crops is forecast at
less than 3m tonnes. In addition, the republic has long term commitments to
supply maize to other southern African countries.
It appears likely, therefore, that it will be necessary for South Africa to
import up to 5m tonnes of maize during the coming months. Some commentators
have suggested that the port facilities are inadequate to handle such
volumes within the time available but Mr van Niekerk assured me that his
department had done the calculations and confirmed that they can and that
imports have already begun to arrive. He also denied that there was any
possibility of rationing over coming months.
Some of his optimism was based, however, on the possibility that South
African-grown wheat could be substituted for maize when it was harvested in
November. But back in the Orange Free State, last week, farmers were
worrying about the continued absence of any rain to provide moisture to
germinate wheat seeds when they were due to be planted in a few weeks time.
Theirs is a summer rainfall area and that season is almost over. If they get
no rain, there will be no point sowing the seed and they will have no crops
to harvest next November.
As the minister said, that is a long way ahead and there will be time to
make arrangements to deal with that problem should it occur. But in the
meantime there is little doubt that the drought, the cost of aid to farmers
and the planned expenditure on food imports will have figured in the South
African budget calculations due to be announced tomorrow. Whichever way you
look at it this is a crucial time for South Africa.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 32
</PAGE>
</DOC>

