
<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06031281 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06031281 </ACCESS>
<CAPTION>  Diagram; DIAGRAM: Graphic by Ron Coddington -- Mercury News; (Entire page
graphic containing the text and graphics listed above)  </CAPTION>
<DESCRIPT>  MIDEAST; WAR; MILITARY; COMPARISON; CHRONOLOGY; MAJOR-STORY  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  A historic resolution;    "The Security Council ...mindful of its duties and
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance
and preservation of international, peace and security...authorizes member
states cooperating with the government of Kuwait, unless Iraqon or before 15
January, 1991 fully implements... the foregoing resolutions, to use all
necessary means... to restore international peace and security in the area."  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  Front  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  ON THE BRINK OF WAR  </HEADLINE>
<MEMO>  Crisis in the Gulf
This article has been retyped for the data base.  </MEMO>
<TEXT>     United Nations Security Council;    November 29, 1990;    ...; War Pros;
Here are the major justifications for war that have been advanced by Bush or
his supporters:; Counter aggression:; Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait has
posed the first crisis of the post-Cold War world. If a new, peaceful
international order is to be established, Iraq's aggression must be rebuffed
quickly and decisively.; Sanctions won't work:; Although sanctions have shut
down Iraq's trade and squeezed its economy, they could take a year or more to
inflict widespread hardship. By then, the alliance against Iraq could crack,
weakening international resolve. There also could be no guarantee that
sanctions will force Saddam to pull out of Kuwait.; Oil:; About one-fourth of
the world's crude oil comes from the Middle East, and about two-thirds of the
world's oil reserves are in the region. With its occupation of Kuwait, Iraq
now controls about 20 percent of the world's reserves. If allowed to corner
the world energy market, Saddam could threaten access to oil at reasonable
prices.; Iraq's weaponry:; Iraq which has a stockpile of chemical weapons and
is developing biological and nuclear weapons, could one day threaten the
security of other oil-rich Arab countries and Israel if its arsenal is not
destroyed now.; Military readiness:; U.S. forces, which will eventually total
some 430,000, will not be able to maintain their readiness indefinitely. The
onset of blistering hot weather will also make U.S. ground operations
difficult between March and October.;   
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx; War Cons; Here
are some of the main reasons cited by Bush's critics for not going to war.;   
World cop:; Once again, the United States is bearing a disproportionate share
of the burden of combating aggression. By some estimates U.S. soldiers would
suffer 90 percent of the casualties in a war.; Let sanctions work:; More than
90 percent of Iraq's imports and 97 percent of its exports have been shut off,
which should eventually cripple the nation. But even if war becomes necessary
to force Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait, it would be better to wage it after the
sanctions have weakened the Iraqi army and air force, depriving them of spare
parts and supplies.; Oil:; Most of the oil output from Iraq and Kuwait could
be saved through tougher fuel conservation measures. Cheap oil isn't worth
fighting over. Indeed, a war would make the price of oil skyrocket and Iraq
could damage production in Saudi Arabia, which pumps more oil than Iraq and
Kuwait combined.; U.S.-Arab relations:; Even if defeated, Saddam could emerge
a hero to Arab masses. Fundamentalists in the Middle East would be emboldened,
U.S. allies would be threatened and anti-American resentment would be
heightened.; Kuwait: Before Iraq's invasion, the Bush administration took no
position on Iraq's border dispute with Kuwait. Now Kuwait has been redefined
as a vital interest of the United States. Some of Iraq's differences with
Kuwait may be legitimate.;   
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx; HOW THE WAR MIGHT
UNFOLD; PHASE 1 (DAY ONE TO THREE) (includes small graphics);    Objective:
Destroy the country's air defense systems, air force installations and command
centers through bombing raids, cutting off most of the Iraqi troops from
Baghdad's central command. Attack and kill Saddam Hussein. Radar-jamming
planes such as the F-4G and EC-130 would disrupt Iraqi communications
equipment.;    F-16 fighters would launch air-to-surface missiles to take out
Iraqi missile sites that could pose a threat to Saudi Arabia or Israel. Those
attacks would be followed immediately by strikes from the Stealth and F-111s
from Saudi Arabia, as well as Navy A-6 fighter-bombers from ships in the
gulf.;    B-52s from Saudi Arabia and the Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia
would take out the layers of radar, surface-to-air missiles and air defense
guns that protect Iraq's major cities and military and industrial
Installations.;    Air Force F-15s and F-16s from Saudi Arabia and F-14s from
ships in the gulf would try to destroy Iraqi combat planes. Warplanes would
attack Saddam at likely locations in Baghdad and throughout Iraq.;   
Obstacles: The key problem would be disabling Iraqi rocket launchers and array
of anti-aircraft artillery.; ...; PHASE 2 (DAY FOUR TO SIX);    Objective: To
eradicate Iraq's chemical sites and nuclear research facilities. Raids on
Iraqi ground troops and an initial Infantry thrust would begin.;    F-111s,
based in Turkey, would destroy northern and western targets, while F-111s in
Saudi Arabia would demolish southern targets.;    Having rid the Iraqi skies
of planes, aircraft would conduct low-level bombings of sites in both Kuwait
and Iraq, where troops have dug in. The hope Is that such firepower, never
experienced by Iraqi troops, would demoralize them.;    U.S. Army and Marine
infantry would begin their advance into Iraq from Saudi Arabia. With Iraq's
ground forces stunned, Turkish and Syrian troops amassed on the northern
border would invade.;    Obstacles: Though most Iraqi air defenses and forces
could be eliminated, many of the country's enormous supply of air defense guns
would be functional and deadly. Also, much of the U.S. technology, including
the Stealth, hasn't been fully battle-tested.; ...; PHASE 3 (DAY SEVEN TO 90);
   Objective: To liberate Kuwait by isolating it and overcoming the Iraqi
troops there.;    U.S.-led forces would use aircraft such as the A-10
Thunderbolt (Warthogs) and Apache helicopters to smash Iraqi tanks and
undermine resistance to ground forces, both in Kuwait and Iraq.;   
Paratroopers would be dropped behind the Iraqi lines in Kuwait.;    Marines
would attempt another amphibious amphibious assault on the shore of Kuwait.;  
 Alliance troops on the Saudi-Kuwaiti border would push across it, slowly
smashing and pushing aside the fortifications the Iraqis have set up along the
frontier.;    The alliance forces Would attempt to engage the elite Republican
guard forces, which number some 105,000, most of which are stationed near
Basra.;    Obstacles: The Iraqi troops are war-tested and have the home
advantage: Protecting Iraq and what they believe to be an extension of their
nation's territory. Iraq could use chemical weapons, which U.S. and Arab
forces could only partially counter. More likely to bog down the alliance is
the static defense line the Iraqis have built up around Kuwait, which include
concrete trenches;   
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx; INTERNATIONAL
FORCES IN THE GULF; Iraqi forces total 1,030,000. A militia may number as many
as 5 million Iraqis. President Saddam Hussein's armaments include 5,500 tanks,
3,500 heavy artillery and more than 500 combat aircraft, along with other
equipment. He is up against an array of International troops and firepower,
some of which is listed below.; Superpowers (includes map); United States:
More than 430,000 military troops or personnel are in the gulf region or on
the way. Deployments could be pushed higher in the event of war. The American
fleet in the gulf and Arabian Sea waters immediately outside totals about 50
ships. The Pentagon has also sent Stealth fighter-bombers and hundreds of
other aircraft.; Soviet Union: One destroyer and an anti-submarine ship.;   
...; Europe (includes map); Belgium: Two mine hunters and a supply ship.;
Britain: Has a flotilla of 10 ships in the gulf and has contributed three
warships, plus about 40 bombers and fighter-jets. Some 35,000 troops sent by
mid-January.; Czechoslovakia: Two hundred chemical warfare experts.; Denmark:
Sent one corvette warship.; France: Fourteen ships, in the gulf or en route,
including the aircraft carrier Clemenceau with anti-tank helicopters, a guided
missile cruiser and two destroyers equipped with anti-ship Exocet missiles,
two frigates and one corvette. A force of 10,000 by mid-January.; Greece: Has
pledged to send its top frigate, the Limos, with a 180-member crew.; Italy:
Two frigates and a support ship are in the gulf. Two corvette warships are in
the eastern Mediterranean off the coast of Turkey.; Netherlands: Has sent one
air defense frigate and one standard frigate. The Dutch navy has sent six
Stinger missiles.; Portugal: Sent a naval support ship.; Spain: Sent one
frigate and two corvette warships.; Germany: Has provided ships to transport
U.S. troops, air fighters to Turkey and promised $2 billion toward
multinational forces, though little money has been received.; ...; Asia
(includes map); Bangladesh: Two thousand troops sent.; Japan: Some $4 billion
pledged, though only $500,000 donated. Handful of medical personnel sent have
since returned.; Pakistan: Thirteen thousand troops sent.; ...; Mideast
(includes map); Egypt: Has sent 29,250 ground troops.; Gulf Cooperation
Council (Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Oman, United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Kuwait):
In all, GCO and other local Arab troops total 150,000.; Saudi Arabia: Has sent
55,000 soldiers and assorted air and ground weaponry.; Syria: Has sent 21,000
ground troops.; ...; Other countries; Australia: Two guided-missile frigates
and a supply ship.; Canada: Two destroyers and a supply ship; Morocco: Has
sent 1,700 ground troops.; Niger: Has sent 480 ground troops.; Senegal: Has
sent 500 ground troops.;
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx; THE ECONOMY AND
WAR; SHORT WAR SCENARIO; Foreign crude oil (includes graph on prices by
quarter for 1990 and 1991); Key assumptions; A quick, positive solution to
Kuwait crisis achieved this winter.; Oil prices drop below $20 by late spring.
Consumer, business confidence recover, aborting recession after one quarter.; 
  Civilian unemployment (includes graph on unemployment by quarter for 1990
and 1991); Business Impacts;    Economy recovers fast from minirecession; real
GNP jumps 5 % from mid-1991 to mid-1992.; Big-ticket items, housing lead the
charge, spurred by cheaper credit, recovery of confidence.; ...; LONG WAR
SCENARIO; Foreign crude oil (includes graph on prices by quarter for 1990 and
1991); Key assumptions; War with Iraq is neither short nor cheap.; Damage to
gulf oil facilities leaves world short by 2-3 million barrels per day through
1991.; Civilian unemployment (includes graph on unemployment by quarter for
1990 and 1991); Business Impacts; GNP falls 2.3% over four quarters.; Energy
crisis adds two percentage points to 1991 consumer price inflation.;   
Source: DRI/McGraw-Hill;   
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx; GULF CRISIS
TIMELINE; AUGUST; 2: Iraq invades Kuwait. U.N. Security Council condemns
invasion. President Bush freezes Iraqi and Kuwaiti assets in the United
States, bans trade with Iraq and bars Iraqi aircraft and ships from U.S.
ports; 3: Arab League condemns invasion.; 6: U.N. Security Council authorizes
economic sanctions against Iraq. Bush orders U.S. forces to Saudi Arabia in
response to fears of an Iraqi invasion of that country.; 9: U.N. Security
Council declares Iraq's annexation of Kuwait null and void. Saddam Hussein
seals off Iraq's borders, trapping an estimated 550 Americans in Iraq and
3,000 in Kuwait.; 16: U.S. begins intercepting ships carrying goods to or from
Iraq and Kuwait; 18: U.N. Security Council demands that Iraq free all
foreigners.; 25: U.N. Security Council authorizes military action to halt
maritime trade with Iraq.; 28: Iraq declares Kuwait its 19th province. U.S.
expels 36 of 55 personnel from Iraqi Embassy in Washington; SEPTEMBER; 14:
U.N. Security Council orders strict controls on humanitarian food aid to Iraq
and Kuwait.; 25: U.N Security Council authorizes air embargo of Iraq.;
OCTOBER; 1: House votes 380-29 in support of gulf deployment of U.S. troops.;
2: Senate votes 96-3 in favor of deployment.; 30: U.S. forces begin 10-day
amphibious training exercise. Boiler pipe on USS Iwo Jima ruptures; 10 sailors
killed.;    NOVEMBER; 4: Pentagon announces call-up of major reserve combat
units.; 8: Two days after fall elections, Bush orders near doubling of U.S.
forces in the gulf to 400,000 to give the United States an "adequate offensive
option."; 15: Saddam says he wants to negotiate with the United States but is
unwilling to leave Kuwait first.; 19: Iraq adds 250,000 troops to the 430,000
already in or near Kuwait.; 29: U.N. Security Council votes 12-2 to authorize
"all means necessary" to remove Iraq from Kuwait if it does not withdraw by
Jan. 15. It is the first time since the outset of the Korean War that the
United Nations has authorized force against a member nation.; 30: Bush
proposes meetings between the United States and Iraq, saying he wants to "go
the extra mile for peace."; DECEMBER; 6: Saddam says all hostages may leave.; 
  JANUARY; 3: Bush proposes talks in Geneva between Secretary of State Jim
Baker and Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz.; 4: Iraq accepts Bush's proposal
for talks between Baker and Aziz.; 8: French officials once again promise
peace plan linking Iraqi withdrawal to Arab-Israeli conference.; 9: Baker,
Aziz meet, but talks fail to resolve crisis.; 12: Congress votes to approve
resolution for use of military force.;
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx; GULF POLLS; Santa
Clara County residents on U.S. action in the gulf; 60% Support; 40% Do not
support; ...; Americans on U.S. action in the gulf; 62% Support; 38% Do not
support; ...; ... And whether congressional approval is needed tor war.; 60%
Need; 40% Do not need; Source: For national figures, The Washington Post and
ABC News. For Santa Clara County figures, The Mercury News  </TEXT>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910131  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Thursday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  January  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  22A  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<FEATURE>  DIAGRAM  </FEATURE>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  2,239  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Thursday January 31, 1991
00031281,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>

