
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910228-0028
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910228-0028.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Winning the Peace:
   U.S. Declares Victory
   And Moves to Shape
   A Stable Gulf Region
   ---
   Bush Halts Offensive Combat,
   Says Kuwait Is Liberated,
   Begins Postwar Planning
   ---
   Now, New Problems to Solve
   ----
   By Gerald F. Seib
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST
</CO>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)
STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
</GV>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- President Bush declared victory in the
Persian Gulf war against Iraq, ending the nearly seven-month
allied struggle to free Kuwait and the campaign to crush
Saddam Hussein's army.
   "Kuwait is liberated. Iraq's army is defeated," the
president told the nation in a televised address last night.
"Our military objectives are met."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The president ordered a cease-fire -- but a temporary one,
contingent on Iraq's freeing its captives, complying with
United Nations resolutions and taking other steps to help
defuse the region. He said that Secretary of State James
Baker will ask the Security Council to begin arranging the
war's conclusion, and that Mr. Baker will travel to the Gulf
next week for consultations on establishing a permanent
peace.
   Late last night it was reported that Iraq's U.N. mission
had sent a letter to the U.N. accepting all the Security
Council resolutions on the Gulf war.
   Although Mr. Bush took pains to note that "no one country
can claim this victory as its own," the triumph will clearly
leave the U.S., along with its friends in Egypt and Saudi
Arabia, as the dominant powers in the Middle East.
   Yet even in the moment of victory, a whole new set of
challenges and anxieties emerges. As the final tank clashes
drew to a close it became clear that allied success came only
at a grisly cost in Iraqi lives, a reality that could
increase the volume and anger of radical voices in the
region.
   No one can be sure whether the smashing U.S.-led victory
will create a region safe from aggression -- or one so
bruised and disheartened it is ripe for radicalization and
destabilization. And America's longtime adversary, Iran, now
might step into a power vacuum, agitating for the departure
of Western forces, opposing Saudi oil policies favorable to
the West, and spreading its brand of Shiite fundamentalism
into a weakened Iraq.
   Winning the war, in short, doesn't guarantee the peace.
   "The problems, the question marks in this war have always
been political, not military," says Zbigniew Brzezinski, the
former national security adviser.
   President Bush himself acknowledged the new and difficult
course ahead. "There can be and will be no solely American
answer to all these challenges," he said. "But we can assist
and support the countries of the region, and be a catalyst
for peace."
   The Bush administration already is laying plans to make
sure its gains aren't squandered after the war. U.S. policy
makers are talking tentatively of securing Kuwait with
demilitarized zones and an Islamic peacekeeping force drawn
largely from Persian Gulf states and Egypt. Then the U.S.
would extract its ground forces from the region while relying
on Gulf governments to craft a new security system that could
be silently supported by Washington. The U.S. could at that
point refocus on the Arab-Israeli problem.
   Before last night's cease-fire -- effective at midnight
EST -- allied forces yesterday were still concluding what
Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf called a "classic tank battle"
against the two remaining divisions of Saddam Hussein's
Republican Guard. That battle raged just inside Iraq to the
north of Kuwait, where a broad sweeping maneuver by U.S.,
French and British forces trapped the premier Iraqi force.
   Iraq's army otherwise now lies in ruins. Following the
allies' lightning-fast ground attack and unrelenting air war,
as many as 3,700 of the roughly 4,200 tanks Iraq had in and
around Kuwait have been destroyed or captured, and well over
50,000 Iraqi soldiers have been taken prisoner, Gen.
Schwarzkopf estimated.
   Early yesterday, Saddam Hussein had made another seemingly
desperate attempt to stop the fighting. In a statement read
on Baghdad Radio, Iraq finally agreed to President Bush's
demand not only to withdraw from Kuwait, but also to accept
U.N. Security Council resolutions that require Baghdad to
drop its claim to Kuwait and that make Iraq liable for paying
war reparations.
   The Bush administration quickly batted down that overture,
as it had every other recent Iraqi peace bid. The statement
was unacceptable, officials said, because Iraq also insisted
that the U.N. simultaneously drop the three resolutions that
imposed trade and economic sanctions. The U.S. wants to keep
those sanctions in place as long as Saddam Hussein remains in
power -- one more incentive, perhaps, for the Iraqi people to
topple him.
   The very terms of the cease-fire are crafted partly to
maintain negotiating pressure over Saddam Hussein. An
administration official said the U.S. doesn't expect him to
give in to all of Mr. Bush's demands of last night. But, the
official said, the administration can say it won't discuss
lifting economic sanction until Saddam Hussein takes the step
of negotiating a formal armistice.
   But the postwar problems go well beyond this. "At this
point, making it very clear Saddam Hussein has been defeated
and there are no illusions about it is good -- provided that
we know how to play the next phase," said William Quandt, a
former National Security Council Middle East analyst now with
the Brookings Institution.
   Here are some of the challenges and opportunities as they
now appear on the eve of a clear military victory:
   The first order of business will be simply pacifying the
stormy border between Iraq and Kuwait. The problem is
exacerbated by the growing likelihood, acknowledged privately
by Bush administration aides, that Saddam Hussein will
survive in power for at least a while longer. The task is
made all the more difficult by new signs that he retains the
ability to launch an occasional Scud missile attack to shake
up any postwar tranquility. U.S. commanders yesterday
conceded that Iraq went into the war with far more mobile
Scud launchers than U.S. intelligence had estimated. Mr. Bush
last night emphasized that the temporary cease-fire would be
off the minute that Iraq fired any Scud missiles.
   So Bush administration officials have privately planned a
series of steps to protect newly liberated Kuwait.
   To insulate Kuwait from follow-on attacks, they are
discussing what one aide calls "reciprocal" demilitarized
zones along the Iraq-Kuwait border. These might be built
along the model of demilitarized zones in the Golan Heights
between Israel and Syria, which have proven highly successful
in keeping the peace.
   Under those arrangements, Kuwait and Iraq would agree on
precisely what kind and how much military equipment and
troops would be allowed in specified border areas. Compliance
might be monitored by aerial surveillance.
   Beyond that, officials of the Gulf Cooperation Council, a
military alliance of Saudi Arabia and the five smaller Gulf
Arab states, already have worked out plans for an Islamic
peacekeeping force to guard Kuwait. Its core would come from
Council states and Egypt, though other Islamic nations such
as Morocco and Pakistan might be represented.
   In that way, U.S. troops could withdraw quickly from the
slice of southern Iraq that they have swept through in their
attacks on the Republican Guard. American officials insist
they haven't any interest in occupying pieces of Iraq or
trying to set up a different government there. And they say
they don't plan for U.S. forces to provide the security
blanket Kuwait needs. Removal of foreign forces would help
prevent another nightmare turn of events or the internal
disintegration of Iraq.
   "We've been saying these are Arab matters for a specific
reason," says one Bush administration official. "We don't
want to be there. And that's not a trick."
   The overall security and prestige of America's friends, of
course, is sure to be enhanced by the crushing defeat allied
forces have dealt to what was widely considered the Arab
world's best army. This particularly enhances the position of
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and Saudi King Fahd, who
gambled that they could defy Iraq and rely on the U.S. to
stand with them -- and who now can claim that their gamble
paid off handsomely.
   "This is almost unqualified good news" for the Egyptian
and Saudi rulers, Mr. Quandt of Brookings says. Though some
Egyptian students have violently protested Egypt's
participation, the dissent has been less than feared.
   The picture is more complicated for Syria. President Hafez
Assad's power clearly is enhanced by the defeat of his
archrival next door, Saddam Hussein, and his new chumminess
with Washington.
   But Mr. Assad also bucked overwhelming public opinion at
home by joining a U.S.-led military coalition. Syrians don't
love Saddam Hussein, but they aren't fond of the U.S.,
either.
   In private discussions with the U.S., Syria acknowledged
that it faced serious internal unhappiness over sending
Syrian forces along on the ground attack in Kuwait. But in
the authoritarian Syrian system, public unhappiness can't be
vented. So Mr. Assad is gambling that he will be able to use
the Iraqi defeat to enhance his own strength in the region
and secure his control over Lebanon while the U.S. and other
Western countries keep silent in appreciation for his help in
the Gulf.
   But there's a troubling long-term question for these
American partners, and for President Bush himself: Precisely
how much anti-Western sentiment has been stirred up by the
sight of allied armies crushing Iraqi soldiers? That
sentiment could vent itself through Islamic fundamentalism, a
potential problem for Egypt and Saudi Arabia as well as for
Syria.
   The air campaign against Iraq, while swift and decisive,
was more brutal than many in the region had anticipated. That
may not translate into much sympathy for Saddam Hussein --
never personally beloved in the Middle East -- but it may
feed anger in the streets.
   In response to the potential for a backlash, America's
regional allies are likely to put new pressure on Washington
to address the Palestinian problem. That, they will argue,
will show that the U.S. is interested in the Middle East for
more than its oil.
   Yet that problem may be harder to solve now, rather than
easier. For starters, there's likely to be new resistance in
Israel, where some are already asking what this war would
have been like with a pro-Iraqi Palestinian state next door.
   Palestinians' support for Saddam Hussein has only deepened
Israeli suspicions. And Yasser Arafat's pro-Iraq stand has
cost him whatever support he had in the Bush administration
and Gulf states.
   Similarly, Jordan's open sympathy for Iraq has deeply
strained relations with the U.S., creating another impediment
to solving the Palestinian problem. Jordan has long been
considered the Arab state most likely to help identify and
shepherd moderate Palestinians into a peace with Israel.
   And even though U.S.-Israeli ties have been strengthened
by Israel's restraint in the face of Scud attacks, strains in
the relationship between the Shamir government and President
Bush surface easily.
   During a recent Oval Office meeting between Mr. Bush and
Israeli Defense Minister Moshe Arens, for instance, Mr. Arens
annoyed the president by complaining about how hard it was to
exercise such restraint, and implied that Israel's air force
could do a better job than America's of destroying Scud
sites. Mr. Bush and other officials were miffed that so
little appreciation was expressed for U.S. efforts to
eliminate the Iraqi military threat.
   Yet an opportunity is hidden among the problems. The new
U.S. bonds with Syria and Saudi Arabia create an opening to
address the Arab-Israeli conflict on a more comprehensive
plane in which the U.S. tries first to lead Arab states to
make peace with Israel, then addresses the Palestinian issue
in that broader process.
   The biggest wild card, though, may be Iran. It is
strengthened simply because its Iraqi foe has been cut down
to size. Tehran will insist on being a part of any new
Persian Gulf security system, and may use its influence
within it to agitate for expelling any Western forces from
the region.
   A muscle-flexing Iran also could clash with Saudi Arabia
on oil policy. The Saudis appear willing to support oil price
moderation as they concentrate on keeping their own
production high after the war; Iran, still rebuilding from
its own debilitating war with Iraq, feels its interests are
best served by higher prices.
   In addition, some Middle East specialists think radical
fundamentalists within Iran will begin trying to undermine
Iraq's government by extending their influence over Shiite
areas in southern Iraq. In 1979, after the Iranian
revolution, Shiite clerics funneled money to this region,
preaching there and calling for the establishment of an
Islamic state in Iraq, which has a large Shiite population.
   "If Saddam Hussein is weak enough, you'll see that kind of
thing going on again," predicts Kenneth Katzman, a former
U.S. intelligence analyst who now is a defense consultant.
Any drift toward a radical Shiite government in Iraq, in
turn, would alarm Saudi Arabia.
   Mr. Katzman believes that Iranian President Ali Akbar
Hashemi Rafsanjani, who is considered a pragmatist, wouldn't
favor such actions. But he probably would have to go along,
much as he did when Iranian Revolutionary Guards sacked the
Kuwait and Saudi Embassies in Tehran following rioting in
Mecca some time ago.
   Iran also may get some leverage from the nearly 150 Iraqi
warplanes "parked" in its territory. Shaul Bakhash, a George
Mason University scholar, says Iran worries that the U.S. and
Saudi Arabia will dominate postwar regional politics. Tehran
could use its control over the warplanes both to secure its
place at any regional security meeting and to press old
demands against Iraq.
   ---
   Robert S. Greenberger contributed to this article.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

