
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910227-0075
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910227-0075.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Allied Forces on Verge of Taking
   Kuwait City as  Iraqi Units Retreat
   ---
   Bush Presses Attack;
   U.S. Armored Group
   Engages Elite Guards
   ----
   By Gerald F. Seib and Andy Pasztor
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/27/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST
</CO>
<GV>
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Allied forces entered Kuwait City last
night, while U.S. troops in Iraq began fighting Saddam
Hussein's vaunted Republican Guard, his last military unit
capable of large-scale organized resistance. The Iraqi army
began what Pentagon officials called a "full retreat"
yesterday after Saddam Hussein publicly declared that he is
ordering it out of Kuwait. But President Bush declared that
the fighting can stop only if Iraqi soldiers "lay down their
arms" and quit the battlefield without their military
equipment.
   Iraqi troops began fleeing Kuwait City and an advance
party of Marines already has reached the U.S. Embassy there,
U.S. officials said. But they warned that one final major
battle may yet remain.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   That decisive contest may have begun last night, as M1-A1
tanks of the Army's Third Armored Division swept eastward
across southern Iraq in a driving rainstorm to pummel and
defeat a Guard division.
   Pentagon officials said that early reports from the field
indicated that U.S. forces captured or neutralized a
Republican Guard mechanized division -- that is, one with
mainly artillery and light armored vehicles. Before the U.S.
bombing began last month, the division had about 10,000
troops.
   U.S. forces suffered only a handful of casualties, the
officials said. After the confrontation with the mechanized
Guard division, U.S. forces continued to push against Guard
armored divisions along a front dozens of miles wide, the
officials said. Those divisions contain hundreds of
top-of-the-line Soviet-made T-72 tanks, and are the prize of
the Iraqi army.
   The Persian Gulf war's final issue is rapidly becoming
just one man: Saddam Hussein. The war is continuing rather
than being ended politically because the U.S. is intent on
putting an end to the Iraqi leader as both a military threat
and an Arab hero. The trick now is to accomplish that without
making him a martyr in the process.
   Yet even as the military rout continues, U.S. officials
are concluding that Saddam Hussein is unlikely to ever accept
President Bush's demand that he acquiesce to all United
Nations resolutions condemning and punishing Iraq. And they
reluctantly concede the Iraqi leader is likely to remain
standing even after his army is totally ejected from Kuwait.
So the mission for U.S. forces now is to disarm and humiliate
him so thoroughly that he isn't a serious threat during what
could be a cold peace following the war. In addition, the
Bush Administration has been planning for details such as a
demilitarized zone along the Iraq-Kuwait border.
   "He is trying to save the remnants of power and control in
the Middle East by every means possible," President Bush
declared in a brief address in the White House Rose Garden.
"And here, too, Saddam Hussein will fail."
   Those presidential remarks, aides said, were intended to
lay down the principles that will guide the U.S. and its
coalition partners in the last stages of the war. The
fighting inside Kuwait will stop, Mr. Bush declared, when
Iraqi soldiers in and around Kuwait "lay down their arms."
   Aside from disarming the better half of Iraq's million-man
army that sits in and around Kuwait, the American aim is to
ensure that Saddam Hussein isn't allowed to frame the
withdrawal of his troops as a political victory. That is
precisely what he attempted to do in a radio address
yesterday in which he congratulated his soldiers for standing
up to a 30-nation coalition assembled by the U.S.
   Mr. Bush now has plenty of cheerleaders urging him on in
the humiliation of Saddam Hussein, even among those who
doubted the wisdom of the war in the first place. Emerging
from a White House meeting yesterday, Sen. Patrick Leahy (D.,
Vt.), who last month opposed the congressional resolution
authorizing war, said, "I think that the president would make
a terrible mistake if he allowed Saddam Hussein to be in the
position where he could declare to his own people some sort
of victory, and there is no sign President Bush intends to do
that."
   As Sen. Robert Dole left the meeting, he turned to the
president and urged: "Don't let Saddam Hussein off the hook."
   The Pentagon is even refusing to rule out seizing or
shooting down Saddam Hussein's plane if he tries to flee
Iraq.
   There is a danger of overreaching. If the effort to make
Saddam Hussein lose power and face becomes too severe, the
U.S. could turn his image from that of a humiliated tyrant to
that of a victim of superpower bullying. Perhaps worse, the
allies could tarnish a victory if they seem willing to
inflict too much damage on Iraq itself in an attempt to
punish Saddam Hussein personally.
   "I don't care if he's a martyr, and I don't think we
should care," said former defense secretary Harold Brown.
"But if it appears that we are making the Iraqi people
martyrs, that would concern me."
   The more immediate problem for U.S. officials, though, is
the final confrontation with Saddam Hussein's
90,000-man-strong Republican Guard. Despite weeks of fierce
bombing, officials say, the Guard unitsespecially their tank
divisions -- remain strong. According to one Pentagon
estimate, less than 30% of the Guard's T-72 tanks were
knocked out of commission by the air war, primarily because
of Iraqi expertise in camouflaging and shielding their
equipment.
   The huge allied armored corps north and west of the Guard
is the biggest combat tank force assembled since World War
II, with more than 1,300 heavy tanks and about 100,000 U.S.
and British soldiers, supported by hundreds of Apache
helicopters and A-10 jets.
   Relying on night-vision goggles, infrared scopes and the
element of surprise, the fast-moving armored column sought to
flush the Guards out of their carefully camouflaged defensive
positions. At that point, facing overwhelming air power and
the cream of the allied army's tanks, Guard commanders will
have the choice of giving up or seeing their divisions
destroyed.
   "The plan is to do all sorts of things to force {Iraqi}
tanks into the open," Lt. Col. Terry Branham, commander of an
Apache squadron with the VII Corps, told reporters recently.
"The whole corps plan is written upon that premise, that he
will have to move to come" toward advancing U.S. tank
columns.
   Late last night, Pentagon officials said that contact
between U.S. and Iraqi tanks had been light, and it was too
early to tell what strategy the Guards would adopt.
   Early indications were that the Republican Guard is
fighting back, even though it has been bombed for weeks, has
had its communication lines disrupted, and now faces an
allied strike force of more than 100,000 soldiers bearing
down from the west and the north. According to preliminary
reports from the front, one Pentagon official said, it
appeared that the Guard maintained discipline and that
companysize units weren't abandoning the battlefield without
orders.
   As the clashes with the Guard intensified, one Army unit
captured a convoy of 50 of the big T-72 tanks trying to flee
northward toward Bagdhad, and allied forces set up a
defensive line near the Euphrates River west of Basra to
block future escape attempts.
   Recently, bad weather has prevented A-10 "Warthog" jets
and and Apache attack helicopters from pounding the dug-in
armor, and the rain and clouds are expected to continue to
inhibit air raids for the next few days.
   If the Iraqi tanks remain in position and refuse to
surrender, the Army's VII Corps probably will attack the
dug-in tanks with close-range, precision artillery and
missile barrages and tank volleys. Then, if the Iraqis still
don't budge, said one Pentagon official familiar with the
battle plan, infantry units now a few miles from Iraqi lines
will creep closer in Bradley fighting vehicles and lob
explosives into the Iraqi trenches and underground shelters.
   More broadly, U.S. commanders reported yesterday that
allied forces have destroyed or rendered ineffective 21 Iraqi
divisions, more than half the total in and around Kuwait.
   Saddam Hussein apparently was hoping to stop this
devastation yesterday with a radio address to his troops and
nation in which he said that Iraqi troops are withdrawing
from Kuwait but that Iraqis should be proud to have stood up
to a 30-nation coalition. He also didn't appear to entirely
give up his claim to Kuwait as a province of Iraq, saying
that the country was annexed on Aug. 8 and "became part of
Iraq legally, constitutionally and actually," while adding
that the situation will change with the pullout.
   By choosing to fight the allies initially and by refusing
to clearly accept all U.N. resolutions ordering him out of
Kuwait, Saddam is "giving us every opportunity to shake the
foundations of his power," said one Bush administration
official.
   U.S. officials are preparing to live with a hostile Saddam
Hussein for at least a while after the liberation of Kuwait.
They intend to push the U.N. Security Council to keep in
place economic sanctions, and State Department officials
yesterday were working on a statement warning of the
consequences Iraq will face if it continues to fire Scud
missiles at Saudi Arabia or Israel once fighting stops.
   U.S. officials say they are well aware of the danger of
making Saddam Hussein a martyr figure through U.S. overkill,
and believe they can avoid that outcome. For starters, the
U.S. hopes that the Iraqi people themselves will conclude
that Saddam Hussein botched both his war with the U.S.-led
coalition and his various attempts to stop it once it was
underway. That, they hope, will prompt forces inside Iraq to
topple him within weeks or months.
   Secondly, the U.S. is calculating that Saddam Hussein will
remain a sympathetic figure to those who revere him no matter
how the U.S. treats him -- and that those who are skeptical
about him will become more so.
   But others, including Soviet officials who have been
trying to broker a peaceful way out for their old ally, warn
of risks. Aleksander Belonogov, a Soviet deputy foreign
minister, said the Kremlin favors restoring Iraq to its
"rightful place" in the Arab world. Failure to do so "would
be a serious mistake because this would lead precisely to the
feelings of rejection that would become the nourishing base
for various revenge-seeking tendencies."
   Of course, the amount of pressure the U.S. will apply
depends on how events on the battlefield play out in the next
two or three days.
   While the tank battles began to the west, allied forces
continued to consolidate positions around Kuwait City, amid
numerous reports from U.S. soldiers and Kuwaiti citizens that
nearly all of the Iraqi troops already have pulled out. Navy
A-6 pilots fresh from air strikes north of Kuwait City
described the roads there as clogged with Iraqi military
vehicles fleeing toward Basra. They said the vehicles were
easy targets.
   "This morning it was bumper tobumper," one pilot told pool
reporters on the carrier USS Ranger. "We hit the jackpot,"
another pilot was quoted as saying.
   Rear Admiral Mike McConnell, director of intelligence for
the Joint Chiefs, said that allied forces found a document,
which he said was written to Iraq's senior generals before
the war started, ordering Iraqi troops to inflict "maximum
casualties" on U.S. troops and also to destroy Kuwaiti oil
facilities.
   Lt. Gen. Thomas Kelly, director of operations for the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, said Iraqi prisoners of war climbed to
about 30,000, but other officials said the total may be
closer to 40,000 and is growing rapidly. Allied commanders
face major problems in providing food, transportation and
medical care for what is likely to turn into well over
100,000 prisoners. Bush administration officials have said
that winning the good will of the prisoners and then sending
them back to Iraq angry at their treatment by Saddam Hussein
is likely to be an important tool in trying to unseat the
current regime.
   Of course, the amount of pressure the U.S. will apply
depends on how events on the battlefield play out in the next
two or three days. The "great tank battle" against Republican
Guard units many U.S. officers anticipated "hasn't
materialized yet," said Lt. Gen. Thomas Kelly, director of
operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, "and whether it
will or not remains to be seen."
   To the south, allied forces continued to consolidate
positions around Kuwait City, amid numerous reports from U.S.
soldiers and Kuwaiti citizens that nearly all of the Iraqi
troops already have pulled out. Navy A-6 pilots fresh from
air strikes north of Kuwait City described the roads there as
clogged with Iraqi military vehicles fleeing toward Basra.
They said the vehicles were easy targets.
   "This morning it was bumper to bumper," one pilot told
pool reporters on the carrier USS Ranger. "We hit the
jackpot," another pilot was quoted as saying.
   Overall, Pentagon officials described Iraqi forces as
confused, leaderless and battle-weary, adding that the few
Guard units that have engaged in tank duels so far haven't
been "any tougher" to defeat than the rest of Saddam
Hussein's army.
   Gen. Kelly said Iraqi prisoners of war climbed to about
30,000, but other officials said the total may be closer to
40,000 and is growing rapidly. Allied commanders face major
problems in providing food, transportation and medical care
for what is likely to turn into well over 100,000 prisoners.
Bush administration officials have said that winning the good
will of the prisoners and then sending them back to Iraq
angry at their treatment by Saddam Hussein is likely to be an
important tool in trying to unseat the current regime.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

