
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910222-0008
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910222-0008.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Peace Initiative:
   Iraq and Soviets Offer
   Kuwaiti Pullout Plan,
   And U.S. Will Study It
   ---
   Proposal Calls for Cease-Fire,
   Quick End to Sanctions;
   Bush Raises `Concerns'
   ---
   For Now, the War Goes On
   ----
   By Gerald F. Seib
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST FREST
</CO>
<GV>
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Iraq agreed to withdraw its forces from
Kuwait if the U.S. and its allies accept a cease-fire in the
Persian Gulf conflict and agree to halt economic sanctions,
raising the first serious prospect that the war can be ended.
   The dramatic announcement, which came after a
post-midnight negotiating session in Moscow, puts President
Bush in a political bind. He won't like the terms Iraq has
agreed to, because they clearly are designed to leave Saddam
Hussein in power with a significant military establishment
still intact. A senior administration official said last
night that the U.S. has "serious problems" with the peace
plan.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Nevertheless, the Iraqi formula came close enough to
meeting Mr. Bush's frequent demands for an "unconditional
withdrawal" that the U.S. will find it hard to dismiss it out
of hand -- and equally hard to launch a bloody ground war
while the proposal remains pending. The plan actually
contains the seeds of a significant political victory for Mr.
Bush, if he can nurture it successfully. And Press Secretary
Marlin Fitzwater said last night that the U.S. would study
the plan.
   Mr. Fitzwater said that President Bush, in a lengthy
telephone conversation, told Mr. Gorbachev he has "serious
concerns" about the plan. For now, the allies will "continue
to prosecute the war," he added. In fact, some military
officials said allied bombing likely would intensify while
diplomatic maneuvering continues so that more Iraqi targets
can be destroyed before a possible cease-fire begins.
   Rep. Lee Hamilton, for one, last night said that while the
proposal has deficiencies it goes far enough that the U.S.
should postpone a ground war for now while continuing
military pressure in other ways. The Indiana Democrat, a
senior member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, admitted that
the plan presents a dilemma for the U.S., but said it "far
advances any previous proposal."
   Most important, last night's plan was the first Iraqi
withdrawal offer that wasn't encumbered by any linkage to
other Middle East problems, notably the Palestinian issue.
That has been the main sticking point that has brought prompt
Bush administration objections to past formulas from Baghdad
and Moscow.
   The survival of a still-potent Saddam Hussein would be a
problem not only for President Bush but for many of America's
chief allies, particularly Israel. And many leaders of Arab
coalition partners -- Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Syria --
privately have been hoping the U.S. will proceed with the
crushing ground assault on Iraqi troops that seemed imminent
before the Iraqi announcement. Having enraged Saddam Hussein,
leaders of those Arab states aren't eager to live with him.
   Yet some allied Arab officials also worry about the sight
of their American friends gunning down hundreds or thousands
of Arab soldiers from Iraq; this may leave them as torn now
as Mr. Bush.
   Above all, the U.S. will be unhappy that the plan would
remove economic sanctions after only two-thirds of Iraqi
forces are withdrawn. In addition, it doesn't set a specific,
speedy timetable for a withdrawal, and it would cancel all
U.N. resolutions that provide for postwar punishment. Those
aspects of the plan might allow Saddam Hussein time to
withdraw all his military gear, and to quickly rebuild his
economy so that he can purchase new weapons.
   And there are other questions. The Soviets said more
details will be announced today, which carries potential
promise and peril for the plan's success. The U.S. is also
growing suspicious of the Soviet role in rescuing its old
ally, Iraq. And it's clear that Iraq, like the U.S., isn't
going to stop its armed actions in the meantime; the Moscow
announcement barely had been delivered when Iraqi Scud
missile attacks were reported near eastern Saudi Arabia.
   So President Bush seems certain to press for changes in
the Soviet-Iraqi formula that would allow the United Nations
Security Council to leave economic sanctions in place. He'll
also want a timetable for withdrawal that would force Saddam
Hussein to leave much of his weaponry behind, as well as
assurances that the U.N. can continue pressing Iraq to pay
war reparations.
   "Let's be very cautious," said Sen. Robert Dole, the
Senate minority leader and a close White House ally. "Let's
remember that Saddam Hussein may be playing a stalling game."
   But Mr. Bush also now seems caught in the gap between the
formal war aims he and the United Nations have proclaimed --
which focus narrowly on Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait and the
restoration of Kuwait's rulers -- and the allies' unofficial
desire to do away with Saddam Hussein's regime along the way.
   The announcement of the peace plan in Moscow occurred only
hours after Saddam Hussein had delivered a defiant speech in
Baghdad in which he seemed to dare the U.S. and its allies to
launch a ground attack to drive his troops out of Kuwait.
That speech now looks as if it was an attempt to deliver a
final rhetorical blast to save face in the Arab world before
seeking a diplomatic cover for withdrawal.
   The eight-point Iraqi proposal, a response to a plan put
forward by Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, was read by
Vitaly Ignatenko, a Soviet spokesman, around 2:30 a.m. Moscow
time (6:30 p.m. EST).
   "It is possible to find a way out of the military conflict
in the Gulf," Mr. Ignatenko announced. He then proceeded to
outline a plan he said Iraq had accepted under which Iraq
would stage a "full and unconditional withdrawal" from
Kuwait. The pullout would begin on the second day after
hostilities stopped -- an apparent reference to a cease-fire.
It would occur in an unspecified, but "fixed," time frame.
   U.N. economic sanctions against Iraq would be lifted once
two-thirds of the Iraqi troops had withdrawn. After the
withdrawal, the U.N. resolutions condemning and punishing
Iraq for its invasion of Kuwait would cease to exist. Once
the ceasefire had taken effect, all prisoners of war would be
released.
   The withdrawal of Iraqi forces would be monitored by
countries appointed by the U.N. Security Council that aren't
directly involved in the war. Further details of how the plan
would work were still being worked out in Moscow and are to
be forwarded to the security council sometime today.
   The eight points contained some elements that Mr. Bush had
privately told Moscow just this week that he needed in any
deal, including freeing of war prisoners and a timetable for
withdrawal. If Iraq really is prepared to withdraw from
Kuwait, which it proudly proclaimed for six months as its
permanent "19th province," Mr. Bush could frame that alone as
a significant diplomatic and political victory.
   It would look particularly stunning because it would have
been achieved with a surprisingly low level of U.S.
casualties -- 20 U.S. soldiers killed in combat and 23
American planes lost in fighting to date. Moreover, the
administration could at least hope that the political
humiliation of a withdrawal after the damage his country has
endured would undercut Saddam Hussein at home and eventually
cause him to be toppled from within.
   But the plan was vague on many details, such as just what
the timetable for withdrawal would be. And it was silent on
other points Mr. Bush sought, such as Iraqi help in clearing
mines from Kuwait.
   U.S. officials have speculated all along that Saddam
Hussein might choose survival over continued occupation of
Kuwait when he thought his options were that stark. Iraq's
acceptance of the agreement suggests that, after 35 days of
ferocious bombing by U.S. and allied warplanes, the Iraqi
leader now may see that his position has become too
precarious.
   But for precisely that same reason, some U.S. officials
have grown increasingly eager to press on with the war to
finish off Iraq's military machine while the chance is
available. What's more, officials suggest that they have
hoped not only to drive his forces out of Kuwait but also to
deliver a death blow along the way to the elite Republican
Guard that have been instrumental in keeping Saddam Hussein
in power.
   Officials now suggest, in fact, that a central purpose of
the land offensive wouldn't be simply to drive Iraqi troops
out of Kuwait but to destroy the Republican Guard units
sitting along the Kuwait-Iraq border. Those units are
essential to Saddam Hussein both politically and militarily,
for the Guards are his best fighters as well as the trusted
home guard that protects him from coups and military
insurrection from within.
   By bloodying the Guards now, the U.S. may hope to make it
more difficult for Saddam Hussein to survive and cause
trouble down the road, even if he is left standing when the
war ends.
   For this reason, officials say the relentless allied
bombardment of bridges crossing the Tigris and Euphrates
rivers has been aimed not only at cutting supply lines but
also at making it more difficult for the Guards to escape
with their heavy equipment to the north when fighting
intensifies. "They want to destroy the Republican Guard,"
said one person familiar with the thinking of the U.S.
military command in Saudi Arabia.
   Now, the Bush administration has to face the prospect of
giving up that hope. And that is a problem for America's Arab
friends as well. Saddam Hussein just yesterday viciously
attacked both Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and Saudi
Arabian King Fahd in his radio address, calling them lackeys
of the U.S. and traitors to the Arab and Islamic worlds --
and virtually inviting their overthrow or slaying. Saudi
leaders, in particular, don't want the war to stop until
Saddam Hussein is out of power because they must share a
long, thinly guarded border with an Iraq that even now could
remain militarily more powerful than the thinly populated
Saudi kingdom.
   Syrian President Hafez Assad will be equally chagrined if
Saddam Hussein, also a neighbor of Syria, is still around to
make trouble. Syria has hoped that the demise of his regime
would increase Syrian power in the region.
   Egypt's Mr. Mubarak is likely to have more ambivalent
feelings. He, too, would be more comfortable if Saddam
Hussein were finished. But in Egypt, more than in Saudi
Arabia, there was growing popular sentiment not to
participate in a ground war in which Iraqi soldiers might be
slaughtered.
   For Israel, there also would be unhappiness if Saddam
Hussein's military machine isn't further dismantled in war.
Still, no matter how the diplomatic maneuvering turns out,
Israel already has seen the Iraqi chemical, biological and
nuclear weapons capabilities it most feared wiped out by
allied bombing raids.
   For the U.S., one of the public complaints is likely to
involve the failure of the plan to comply with all 12 U.N.
resolutions passed to compel Iraq to leave Kuwait. But in
fact, many of them either aren't binding or have been
overtaken by events.
   Five of the resolutions deal with various aspects of the
economic embargo. Others pertain to such matters as the
treatment of embassies in Kuwait City, which are now closed,
and to freeing Western hostages, who were released before the
war started. The murkiest U.N. statement deals with
reparations or war-crimes charges Iraq might have to face
after the war. Though the Security Council voted to hold Iraq
liable for war damages and invited countries to collect
evidence for a possible judicial process later, no such
process was actually established.
   The broader dilemma is that the proposal forces Mr. Bush
to make a choice he had hoped to avoid: between the prospect
of achieving the minimum goal of freeing Kuwait without
further bloodshed, and the chance to crush President Hussein
and his military might at the risk of a bloody ground war.
   By presenting Mr. Bush with that choice, Saddam Hussein
may not only be posing an agonizing decision but finally
taking a step toward splitting the extraordinary
international coalition that Mr. Bush built -- many of whose
members will want to accept the Iraqi withdrawal and declare
victory.
   And the Soviets, whose help was instrumental in pressing
the anti-Iraq campaign at the U.N., certainly will urge
American acceptance. That, too, poses a dilemma for Mr. Bush.
   Increasingly Mr. Gorbachev's Kremlin, which is influenced
more and more by oldline military officers and party
hardliners, has seemed to want to preserve its old ally,
Saddam Hussein, to ensure Soviet influence in the Middle
East. That makes U.S. officials suspect Soviet motives as a
peacemaker -- and also raises questions about whether the
diplomatic process now under way could lead to a less
hospitable new order in the region than the U.S. had once
hoped.
                                                                                                       

   Walter S. Mossberg contributed to this article.
   ---
                 The Persian Gulf War
                                                                                                       

   Aug. 2 Iraq invades Kuwait.
                                                                                                       

   Jan. 16 U.S.-led forces launch air attacks on Iraq aimed
at driving Saddam Hussein's troops from Kuwait. The response
from Iraq's military is limited.
                                                                                                       

   Jan. 17 Baghdad tries to draw Israel into the conflict by
firing missiles at major cities in the Jewish state. The
anti-Iraq coalition presses its air assault.
                                                                                                       

   Jan. 20 Saddam Hussein's army lobs a barrage of Scud
missiles at Saudi Arabia, but batteries of U.S.-made Patriot
missiles intercept the weapons.
                                                                                                       

   Jan. 22 Iraq sets fire to oil facilities inside Kuwait,
U.S. officials say, in an apparent attempt to disrupt aerial
bombardment and surveillance. An Iraqi missile strikes Tel
Aviv.
                                                                                                       

   Jan. 24 The Gulf hostilities expand to the sea as U.S.
forces capture a small Kuwaiti island and as a Saudi warplane
downs two Iraqi jets that may have been hunting allied ships.
                                                                                                       

   Jan. 25 The U.S. says Iraq releases millions of gallons of
oil into the Persian Gulf.
                                                                                                       

   Jan. 27  The U.S. bombs Iraqi-controlled oil facilities in
Kuwait in an attempt to stanch the mammoth spill.
                                                                                                       

   Jan. 28 Scores of Iraqi planes flee into Iran in an
apparent attempt to avoid U.S.-led raids.
                                                                                                       

   Jan. 29 Bush delivers his State of the Union address and
says the U.S. "will prevail" in forcing Iraq from Kuwait.
                                                                                                       

   Jan. 30 A dozen U.S. Marines are killed as Iraqi soldiers
launch ground assaults against allied forces, crossing into
Saudi Arabia and battling in and around the town of Khafji.
                                                                                                       

   Feb. 5 Bush says he is "somewhat skeptical" that air power
alone will force Iraqi troops to leave Kuwait, as new
intelligence reports suggest Iraq's ability to resist a
ground offensive is diminishing rapidly.
                                                                                                       

   Feb. 12 Iraq says it is ready to work with the Soviet
Union to end the war.
                                                                                                       

   Feb. 13 U.S. bombs hit what Iraq calls a bomb shelter in
Baghdad, killing scores of civilians. The U.S. says the
facility was a military communications center.
                                                                                                       

   Feb. 15 Iraq says it is prepared to discuss withdrawing
from Kuwait if certain conditions are met. Bush rejects the
offer as a "cruel hoax."
                                                                                                       

   Feb. 18 Moscow offers Iraq a plan to end the war. The plan
appears to demand an unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait but
offers in return some assurances that Baghdad's government
will remain.
                                                                                                       

   Feb. 19 Bush, appearing intent on launching a ground
attack against Iraq, says the Soviet plan falls short of his
conditions for ending the fighting.
                                                                                                       

   Feb. 21 Iraq responds positively to a Soviet proposal for
the withdrawal of Baghdad's forces from Kuwait.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

