
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910412-0119
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910412-0119.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Bush vs. Saddam -- The Final Round
   ----
   By Fred C. Ikle
</HL>
<DATE>
04/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)
</GV>
<RE>
IRAQ (IZ)
</RE>
<LP>
   The news from Iraq is bad. After the brilliant military
victory, a colossal human tragedy is emerging that is
bringing the U.S. to the edge of a political defeat. For it
is the human dimension, we all know, that shapes the verdict
of history. But don't despair; the great victory in the Gulf
war -- now looking so tattered and tarnished -- can yet be
saved.
   The dynamics of the situation will soon force a change.
Within days, the United Nations will be compelled to
implement a massive intervention in Iraq's internal affairs,
under the term of its cease-fire. If the U.N. fails, it will
become irrelevant as the League of Nations did in the 1930s.
As day follows night, the U.N. will thus move into ever
expanding confrontations and conflicts with Saddam Hussein
and his remaining military forces. Either Saddam Hussein will
win by destroying the credibility and influence of the U.N.,
or he will finally make his last mistake.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Between the invasion of Kuwait last August and the end of
the Gulf war, many brave souls inside and outside the U.S.
government worried about clever stratagems that Saddam
Hussein might employ to defeat the U.S. What if he split the
coalition by making enticing offers? What if he dragged
Israel into the war? What if he inflicted heavy casualties?
What if he suddenly withdrew from Kuwait to save his huge
army and then built nuclear weapons -- as Lenin saved his
Bolshevik regime by surrendering a third of Russia to the
Germans in the Brest-Litovsk treaty? Well, Saddam Hussein may
be twice as brutal as Lenin, but he is only one-tenth as
smart.
   George Bush, by contrast, developed a coherent strategy to
liberate Kuwait; backed up his diplomacy with a war plan that
provided for sufficient force to achieve a clear military
objective; obtained at every step the endorsement not only of
America's allies but -- miraculously -- also of the U.N.
Security Council; secured public support at home and the
consent of a divided, reluctant Congress; wisely left
military campaigns and tactics to his commanders; and fended
off a last minute attempt by Mikhail Gorbachev to turn Iraq
into a Soviet protectorate.
   Now, for the coming final round in "Bush vs. Saddam," I
certainly wouldn't place my bets on the half-witted Butcher
of Baghdad.
   To be sure, many critics now fear President Bush has
walked away from this final round, leaving Iraq a vast
disaster area, like an abandoned Chernobyl reactor, and
condemning Kurds and Shiites to choose between permanent
refugee camps, prison or death. Even if the president wanted
to, he could not walk away from Iraq's internal affairs. Not
without destroying the U.N., and thus destroying any chance
of success for his Middle East peace diplomacy; not without
inscribing "his" Gulf war on the same tablet as Woodrow
Wilson's League of Nations and Lyndon Johnson's war in
Vietnam.
   Saddam Hussein will, of course, try to turn America's
victory into a Pyrrhic one. In an hour-long speech on March
16, he praised political pluralism, democracy and Iraq's
future contribution to stability in the Middle East. He was
appealing, it seems, to Washington's interest in some balance
among Iran, Iraq and Syria; to Ankara's concern about turmoil
on Turkey's southern border; and perhaps to friendly German
arms merchants who would again want to do business with him.
But then he hurled at his neighbors and at the world at large
acts of mass cruelty that compelled Ankara and London, Tehran
and Paris, Bonn and -- yes -- Washington, to recognize that
one's own moral integrity is more important than Iraq's
territorial integrity.
   Even though the Bush administration's response to the new
challenge has been mysteriously slow and inept, Saddam
Hussein's most recent depredations have killed his last
chance to plead for "magnanimity in victory," or to posture
himself as the "lesser evil," who would, at least, give us
the blessings of "stability" in Iraq. He also prevented his
few remaining supporters in the U.N. from diluting the tough
cease-fire terms.
   Now the U.N. is committed to implementing the destruction
of all of Iraq's chemical and biological weapons,
longer-range ballistic missiles, and nuclear materials and
components. And once Iraq is permitted to resume oil exports,
it must contribute part of its earnings to a
U.N.-administered fund for reparations to Kuwait and other
victims of its aggression. It is most implausible that Saddam
Hussein could survive as Iraq's dictator and comply with
these terms. To become a law-abiding ward of the U.N. is too
alien to his mindset, too contrary to the thuggery that his
henchmen are forced to practice.
   When Saddam Hussein is told to hand to the U.N. a list of
all his prohibited weapons as a first step in complying with
the ceasefire, he might well respond by arguing: (1) Iraq
never had any of these weapons, (2) if it had, American
bombing raids have destroyed every one of them, and (3) if
there were remaining weapons, all records have been burned by
Kurdish terrorists. But he will not refrain from using more
brutal ways as well to obstruct the implementation of the
U.N. directives. We should expect unexplained disappearances
of U.N. arms control inspectors, crashes (blamed on Kurds) of
U.N. helicopters looking for hidden chemical weapons, and the
killing of thousands of Iraqi soldiers, scientists and
technicians who might reveal the location of prohibited
weaponry.
   Saddam Hussein may not realize it, but as he begins to
obstruct, violate and sabotage the U.N. implementation of the
ceasefire agreement, he must take on not just some
bureaucrats at U.N. headquarters and the U.N. flag. He must
take on George Bush and Old Glory. Since Mr. Bush has just
succeeded in turning the U.N. into a useful instrument for
enhancing world order, he can't let Saddam Hussein steal his
success. Moreover, the president will depend on the U.N. "to
put an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict," a key policy goal
he announced after Desert Storm.
   Nearly all suggestions for the Arab-Israeli conflict call
for territorial concessions by Israel in exchange for
internationally guaranteed security arrangements -- the
"territory for peace" principle to which the president
referred. How could the U.S. ever help to promote such a deal
if it permitted Iraq to violate the U.N. cease-fire terms?
Since the U.S. achieved total military dominance over the
Iraqi forces and now plays a leading role in the U.N., the
conditions for enforcing U.N. prohibitions on armaments are
optimal. If international security guarantees were to fail in
this instance, the deal that could be offered to Israel would
no longer be "territory for peace," but territory for a
worthless U.N. document.
   Senior administration officials are saying that the Desert
Storm victory opened "a window of opportunity" for U.S. peace
efforts in the Arab-Israeli conflict. For this to be true,
Saddam Hussein must not be allowed to slam the window shut.
   Five weeks ago, in his triumphant speech to Congress,
President Bush said that "our commitment to peace in the
Middle East does not end with the liberation of Kuwait."
Indeed, it does not. The U.S. is committed to support the
U.N., and the U.N. is now committed to inserting itself
deeply into the internal affairs of Iraq. The success or
failure of this endeavor will largely determine the prospects
for peace in the Middle East. It will also determine the
final winner in the contest between George Bush and Saddam
Hussein.
   ---
   Mr. Ikle, now with the Center for Strategic &amp;
International Studies in Washington, D.C., was Undersecretary
of Defense in the Reagan Defense Department.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

