
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ900809-0022
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
900809-0022.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Desert Drama:
   U.S., Iraq Square Off
   As GIs Move Into Gulf,
   Kuwait Is `Annexed'
   ---
   Bush Demands a Rollback,
   Warns Saddam Hussein
   Not to Use Chemical Arms
   ---
   Assessing Baghdad's Army
   ----
   By John J. Fialka and Andy Pasztor
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/09/90
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST
</CO>
<IN>
PETROLEUM (PET)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
AEROSPACE (ARO)
CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)
</IN>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
</GV>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Barely two months ago, some of the U.S.
Army's top brass assembled at Fort Leavenworth, Kan., to hear
the result of a secret war game. The powerful army of
"Shattland" had plunged into the rich oil fields of
"Audialand."
   Based on the maps used in the game, Shattland was Iraq.
Audialand was Saudi Arabia. And the outcome was nightmarish:
The U.S. could not overpower the enemy without wiping out
production facilities at the world's biggest oil fields,
sending the world economy into a tailspin for many months
thereafter.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Now, the U.S. faces the danger of fantasy becoming
reality, and the next 48 hours pose the most vulnerable
period. With the U.S. just beginning to convey a massive
military force to the Persian Gulf region, Iraqi ruler Saddam
Hussein has a window of opportunity of about that much time
to freely deploy his formidable army, possibly unleash his
vast chemical-weapons stockpile and test whether the West's
ships really intend to blockade his oil shipments.
   "If Saddam is going to move militarily, he's going to do
it very soon," says William Cohen of Maine, the ranking
Republican on the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.
"He won't want to wait until we have everybody in place
there."
   One flashpoint may come as soon as today, when an
Iraqi-owned supertanker attempts to take on Iraqi oil from
the Saudi oil terminal at Yanbu in the Red Sea. According to
industry and other sources, the Iraqis may be using the ship
to force a confrontation with a powerful U.S. naval force
situated near the port. The U.S. hasn't formally declared a
blockade, but U.S. forces are unlikely to simply let the
Iraqi ship pass.
   Both Iraq and the U.S. yesterday appeared to move closer
to confrontation in their public statements. Iraq declared
that it had formally annexed Kuwait, dropping all pretense
that it intended to pull out of the nation it invaded last
Thursday. Referring to the buildup of Western forces in the
region, Iraq said, "We will fight your criminal force. . . .
The blood of our martyrs will burn you."
   President Bush, saying that "a line has been drawn in the
sand," vowed in a televised address that he wouldn't tolerate
the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait. The president stressed that
U.S. troops are intended to defend the Saudi kingdom, not to
drive Iraq out of Kuwait.
   The president said he hopes to free Kuwait through
economic pressure on Saddam Hussein, which continued to mount
as the world's oil-consuming nations -- and, just as
importantly, many of its leading oil producers -- joined
together in a campaign to cut off Iraqi oil without causing
global economic dislocation.
   The Arab world continued trying to sort out its response
to the action in the Middle East. Egyptian President Hosni
Mubarak called for an emergency meeting in Cairo today at
which Arab leaders will agonize over whether to support
putting a multinational army in the path of Saddam Hussein.
King Hussein of Jordan, who had been supportive of Iraq, said
he would refuse to recognize the official annexation that
Saddam Hussein announced yesterday in Bagdhad.
   The most pressing question on the minds of many now is:
Just how tough is Iraq? Its army, battle-trained and wielding
the most modern Soviet-made tanks and air-defense weapons,
has already impressed U.S. experts with the skill and
efficiency of its 2 a.m. blitzkrieg attack on Kuwait last
Thursday.
   Its airpower is no match for the U.S. But on the ground,
where any confrontation would be likely to matter most in the
opening scenes, the Iraqi army is far from the rag-tag
assemblage it was 10 years ago when it first attacked Iran.
   The prospect of facing hundreds of thousands of soldiers
in the desert is daunting enough for the U.S., but Iraq's
chemical arsenal adds an additional dimension to the threat.
The Iraqis have moved surface-to-surface Scud missiles into
Kuwait -- missiles that can carry chemical warheads.
President Bush yesterday singled out chemical weapons. Their
use, he said, "would be intolerable." He added: "It would be
dealt with very, very severely."
   The potential U.S. response to a chemical weapons attack,
according to U.S. officials, could include raids from B-52's
now positioned on Diego Garcia, a base in the Indian Ocean.
Their most likely aim would be to pulverize Iraq's most
sensitive weapons facilities, including those that produce
chemical weapons and those that are experimenting with
missiles and nuclear and biological weapons. Another possible
bombing target, of course, might be Saddam Hussein himself.
   It remained unclear precisely what force the U.S. is
dispatching to meet the 100,000 or more heavily-armored Iraqi
troops massed on Kuwait's border. President Bush, Secretary
of Defense Richard Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, refused to disclose
the size of the force they have committed. "We will deploy
adequate forces for the mission," said Gen. Powell.
   Privately, U.S. officials say the estimates for the
eventual U.S. commitment of troops, which began landing at
Saudi bases yesterday afternoon, go as high as 40,000, and
would include a carefully-tailored mix of light and armored
units that may have to remain there for weeks or months. The
duration of the U.S. commitment will, the officials added,
depend on Iraq's response.
   As time passes without an Iraqi military move, the U.S.
position grows stronger, military experts say. "Every hour
that goes by without an attack now is good," said Paul K.
Davis, director of strategy assessment at the Rand Corp. in
Santa Monica, Calif. "It indicates that he {Saddam Hussein}
is probably facing up to the fact that things have not gone
his way in the world."
   Mr. Davis, who previously worked on Middle East deployment
scenarios in the Pentagon, expects that it will take "days,
not hours" for the U.S. soldiers and airmen arriving to
acclimate themselves to the hot desert arena where they may
have to fight.
   The use of chemical weapons by Iraq would make the battle
conditions all the more intolerable -- necessitating gas
masks and rubberized suits in an area where temperatures
regularly exceed 100 degrees. "The really appalling thing for
American forces on the ground is the fact of being forced
into anti-chemical warfare gear which will be quite
intolerable in the desert," said Elizabeth Sigmund, a British
chemical-weapon expert. "Let's hope they don't have to."
   By her measure, Iraq has stockpiled thousands of tons of
mustard gas, a World War I chemical that burns the skin. It
may also have hundreds of tons of Sarin, a nerve gas
developed from insecticides by the Germans in World War II.
One drop on the skin can cause convulsions and sudden death.
   Among Mr. Bush's advisors, though, Gen. Powell expressed
the most confidence about the outcome. He pointed out that
the 3,000 paratroopers from the 82nd Airborne Division that
were now encamped in the desert, primarily to guard U.S.
fighter aircraft, have been trained to fight in heavy,
charcoal-impregnated chemical weapons gear in the deserts of
California.
   Even the mere threat of chemical weapons may have a
powerful psychological effect on troops and civilians --
especially technicians in the Saudi oil fields, who are
particularly important now that the Saudis are being counted
on to increase oil output significantly.
   But no one can predict the mind of Saddam Hussein. Instead
of ordering his tanks, troops and chemical warheads into
Saudi Arabia, he has the opportunity to create an incident
today, using the supertanker that arrived at the Saudi port
of Yanbu yesterday.
   The port sits at the end of one of the major pipelines
from Iraq's oil fields. If, as some industry and other
officials believe, the captain demands that the Saudis honor
their contractual commitment to fill the tanker, the U.S.
will have to decide whether to stop the giant ship, using the
awesome combat power of the nearby carrier Eisenhower and its
twelve escort ships.
   While pondering his water options, Saddam Hussein must
weigh his major vulnerability to attacks from the air. More
than 100 U.S. aircraft, largely F-15s coming from Langley Air
Force Base in Virginia, have already arrived to augment the
two carriers and their 80 warplanes each.
   Geoffrey Kemp, a former National Security Council Middle
East specialist now at the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, says that despite its hard-fought years
up against Iran, the Iraqi army has never before been
confronted with that kind of air power. Indeed, most of
Iran's jet fighters were either destroyed in the early days
of the war or were grounded for lack of spare parts.
   "I think we're overestimating the ease with which he can
roll into Saudi Arabia," Mr. Kemp said.
   Although the sudden U.S. moves to Saudi Arabia may seem
ad-hoc, they draw on the experience of many war games, such
as the one staged in Leavenworth last June by the Army
Materiel Command. The Army's Saudi games began more than ten
years ago, when U.S. and Saudi officials began to worry that
Soviet armored forces could quickly sweep down through Iran
or Iraq and take the oil fields. U.S. policy assumed then
that the Saudis would not give U.S. forces basing rights, at
least not in the initial stages of a conflict.
   The real-life scenario began Saturday when, according to
Mr. Cheney, the White House began planning to send him to
Saudi Arabia. The following afternoon, he and Robert Gates,
the president's deputy advisor for national security; Paul
Wolfowitz, Mr. Cheney's top policy aide; and Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf, soon to become overall commander of the growing
nucleus of U.S. forces, were aloft.
   In Jeddah, after two hours of discussion, King Fahd, the
Saudi ruler, gave his approval to the military options the
U.S. officials presented. As Mr. Cheney put it, the Arab
leaders agreed that Saddam Hussein's menacing behavior
"represented a qualitative shift in the rules of behavior" in
the Middle East.
   After the Sunday meeting, Mr. Cheney immediately called
President Bush and the president authorized him to give the
orders to the Joint Chiefs to set their plans in motion,
assigning specific U.S. units. The orders were issued Monday
evening, and the first U.S. unit to move -- believed to be
the command staff of Gen. Schwarzkopf's Central Command at
Tampa, Fla. -- took off at 7:30 a.m. EDT Tuesday.
   By midnight, paratroopers of the Ready Brigade of the 82nd
Airborne Division, the nation's most often-alerted unit, were
lining up at Pope Air Force Base in Fayetteville, N.C., to
take their places on the hard, nylon-webbing seats in the
transports that would carry them and their hastily-assembled
gear on the long trip across the Atlantic.
   Meanwhile, flight after flight of F-15's was taking off
from Langley Air Force Base heading east, seeking the line of
airborne tankers that were hovering, mid-ocean, to refuel
them. What military planners call the "aluminum bridge"
across the Atlantic was now in operation.
   Hundreds of Air Force reservists -- men and women with
practiced skills in the art of airlifts -- were moving across
the U.S. to help prepare other units. Army reservists
prepared mechanized infantry units, which will likely use
eight fast "roll on roll off" ships to carry them across the
Atlantic and through the Suez Canal.
   In the Indian Ocean, the Navy was moving special
pre-positioned ships toward the Gulf from their base at Diego
Garcia. They are designed to supply Marine forces, which can
be flown rapidly from U.S. bases to "marry up" with their
equipment at points where the ships arrive. Indeed, according
to the Associated Press, hundreds of marines had already
appeared last night near Khafji, an oil-terminal city near
the Saudi border with Kuwait where the Japanese-owned Arabian
Oil Co. operates. That may indicate that the job of
protecting the oil fields belongs to the Marines.
   Gen. Powell dismissed concerns that the early arrivals
might face the greatest danger, saying that fighters and
attack aircraft from the carrier Independence, believed to be
in the Gulf of Oman, were close enough to the Saudi shore to
provide air cover to the arriving troops. The Eisenhower,
from its position in the Red Sea, can also hit Iraq. Soon a
third carrier task force, led by the Saratoga, will arrive in
the Eastern Mediterreanean, putting it within lethal range.
That group includes the battleship Wisconsin, carrying cruise
missiles that can be aimed precisely toward Iraqi targets.
   Each carrier hauls a kind of mini-Air Force, including
radar search planes and planes specially equipped to jam
enemy communications and radars, along with a powerful
assemblage of bombers and fighters. The planes use special
"buddy stores," or refueling kits that would allow them to
reach their targets in the area -- generally more than 600
miles, or a little more than an hour's flying time, away --
and return safely.
   Summing up his views of the potential enemy, Gen. Powell
said, "We view them as a capable military force. But they're
not invincible and they're not ten feet tall."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

