
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910418-0105
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910418-0105.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Health:
   Test Identifies
   Patients at Risk
   Of Heart Attack
   ----
   By Jerry E. Bishop
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   BMY MRK
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)
MEDICAL AND BIOTECHNOLOGY, GENETIC RESEARCH, PROSTHETICS (MTC)
</IN>
<RE>
NEW JERSEY (NJ)
NEW YORK (NY)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- An experiment with more than 1,700 high blood
pressure patients showed that a blood and urine test can
pinpoint those patients most likely to have a heart attack.
   The experiment suggests that doctors could test their
patients with mild to moderate high blood pressure to
determine how intensively they should be treated to prevent
heart attacks, researchers said. The experiment indicated
that the test can spot those patients with extremely low risk
of heart attack as well as those with a high risk.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The experiment also hinted that the blood and urine test,
which measures the activity of a blood protein called renin,
might suggest a new "risk factor" for heart attacks. About
half of the 1.5 million Americans who suffer a heart attack
each year don't have the known risk factors for heart
disease, such as high cholesterol levels, cigarette smoking,
obesity and high blood pressure. It is unknown what
distinguishes these seemingly healthy people from those who
don't suffer heart attacks.
   The blood and urine test is already being done in many
commercial laboratories but for medical conditions other than
heart attack risk, said John H. Laragh of the Cardiovascular
Center at Cornell University and New York Hospital. "In our
hands, it cost about $40 and in other labs it may cost the
patient $40 to $80," he said. Dr. Laragh pioneered the
research underlying use of the test, which was developed by
his wife, biochemist Jean E. Sealey. The test, which isn't
patented, is available in kit form to laboratories.
   The blood portion of the test determines whether the
kidneys are releasing renin into the blood stream and how
active the chemical is. The release of renin is the first
step in a rapid chemical chain reaction that raises blood
pressure. The urine portion of the test tells how much salt
is in the bloodstream. A high concentration of salt in the
blood also raises pressure.
   The test is based on the fact that if the salt
concentration in the blood rises, tending to boost blood
pressure, the activity of the renin normally drops to offset
the effect of the salt.
   The new experiment was designed to test a theory put forth
by Dr. Laragh and his colleagues that the activity of the
renin in the blood foretells a possible heart attack. The
theory has provoked sometimes furious controversy for almost
20 years.
   The Cornell cardiologist has argued that in many people
with high blood pressure the activity of the renin in the
blood is much higher than is warranted by the amount of salt
in the blood. Such "high renin" people are at a high risk of
a heart attack. On the other hand, in other patients with
high blood pressure, the activity of the renin is much lower
than is warranted by the degree of salt in the blood. These
"low renin" people are at a low risk of heart attack, Dr.
Laragh has maintained.
   In the experiment, blood and urine samples were obtained
at New York City offices and factories from 1,717 workers
found to have mild to moderate high blood pressure. The
patients' high blood pressure was initially discovered in a
screening program carried out by Michael H. Alderman and his
colleagues at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, who
operate a work-site blood pressure control program in
cooperation with local unions.
   In 1981, Dr. Laragh's group began testing the renin
activity in blood and urine samples collected by Dr.
Alderman's team. They kept track of the workers for more than
eight years to see which had heart attacks.
   The results, published in this week's New England Journal
of Medicine, lend strong support to Dr. Laragh's theory. Only
12% of the patients had high renin "profiles." But the seven
heart attacks in this small group constituted the highest
incidence of heart attacks among the patients, 13 heart
attacks per 1,000 person-years of observation.
   The incidence in the high renin patients was more than
double the incidence in those with a normal renin profile --
5.3 heart attacks per 1,000 person-years -- and more than
triple that of the patients with a low renin profile, 3.3 per
1,000 person-years, Drs. Alderman, Laragh and their
respective colleagues reported.
   Regardless of how the statisticians broke down the
patients into various groups, those with high renin profiles
almost invariably had the highest incidence of heart attacks.
Smokers had more heart attacks than nonsmokers, but the
incidence of attacks in smokers with high renin profiles was
more than six times that in smokers with low renin profiles.
   "But the real dynamite is in the patients who didn't have
any of the usual risk factors," Dr. Laragh said in an
interview.
   Among patients who had normal blood cholesterol level and
were free of diabetes, "those with high renin profiles were
seven times more likely to have a myocardial infarction
{heart attack} than those with normal or low renin profiles,"
the researchers wrote. There were no heart attacks among the
240 patients with low renin profiles who had no risk factors
other than high blood pressure.
   To Dr. Laragh, this suggests that a high renin profile
might signal a high risk of heart attack even for people
without high blood pressure. "We think everybody should have
this simple and accurate test," he said in the interview.
"It's a new window into heart disease."
   In an accompanying editorial, Victor J. Dzau of Stanford
University medical school said the study shows that the renin
profile test is "potentially useful" in identifying high
blood pressure patients who are at risk of a heart attack.
But, he wrote, "a larger, population-based study will be
important in confirming the results of this paper."
   The experiment has implications for drug makers as well as
patients. Apparently by coincidence, Abbott Laboratories
announced on Tuesday that is developing a high blood pressure
drug that works by inhibiting the activity of renin. Other
major drug makers are thought to also be working on renin
inhibitors. The experiment hints these drugs might also
protect patients from heart attacks.
   A big-selling class of high blood pressure drugs,
including Bristol-Myers Squibb Corp.'s Capoten and Merck &amp;
Co.'s Vasotec, are known as ACE inhibitors because they work
by stopping renin in the blood from being converted to a
second chemical called angiotensin. Studies are under way to
see if these ACE inhibitors protect patients against heart
attacks as well as lower their blood pressure.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
