
<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59402 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar007___94023" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  27 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG, MACAO </F>
<H3> <TI>   Governor's `New Tactics'; Chinese Response </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0087A Hong Kong MING PAO YUE-KAN [MING PAO MONTHLY] in 
Chinese No 335, Nov 93 pp 28-33 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0087A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong MING PAO YUE-KAN [MING PAO MONTHLY] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hong Qingtian (3163 3237 3944): "China, Britain, </F>
Hong Kong At Crossroads of History"] 
  [Excerpts] Patten Poses Seven Challenges to China in 
Second Annual Report--Patten's New Tactics and Challenges to 
China 
  [passage omitted] 
  1. Abandoning his "from politics to politics" stance, which 
is that politics is self-justifying and self-sufficient, Patten 
has now woven politics into the lives of the people of Hong 
Kong, making it part and parcel of the local way of life and 
inseparable from the war on corruption, the rule of law, 
freedom, education, and the quality of governance -- all 
"perennial concerns" in Chinese society. [passage omitted] 
  The way Christopher Patten talked last year, you would have 
thought he were in Britain. Now Patten takes life in Hong Kong 
as his point of departure, arguing that democratic politics of a 
high quality are what the people of Hong Kong need to maintain 
the "Hong Kong system." How can the Chinese authorities be 
persuasive if they reject his argument? What alternative can the 
Chinese offer? If the Chinese come up with their own agenda, 
what must it contain that would invalidate the British position? 
How to sever the linkage between "politics" and the "Hong Kong 
way of life?" When Hong Kong fought for democracy in the 1980's, 
Xu Jiatun [6079 1367 1470] tried countering Hong Kong's 
capitalist primary democracy with advanced socialist democracy. 
Subsequently China rejected Hong Kong's political demands by 
questioning their timetable. After Patten came to Hong Kong, the 
Chinese could no longer keep acting anti-democratic. All they 
could do was to declare that they too were for democracy but 
that the dispute between China and Britain is not one over the 
extent of democracy but one involving trust between two nations. 
Now that Patten has made politics an integral part of the life 
of the Hong Kong people and their institutions, can the Chinese 
continue to counter it with the argument that it is all a matter 
of trust between nations? 
  2. In contrast to his past arrogance and wilfulness, Patten 
now says, "I have grown to like Hong Kong more and more. I have 
deep feelings for this place." He hopes that "as it advances 
with big strides into the 21st century, Hong Kong will be like a 
beacon, shining brightly as if to announce its glorious 
achievements. It will also set an excellent example 
demonstrating that in a system of freedom, people can 
successfully overcome all sorts of adversity and difficulties 
and, hand in hand, create a wonderful future." (Section 190) 
  After the governor presented his first annual report to the 
Legislative Council last year, the Chinese authorities initially 
took a heavy-handed approach. It was so severe and threatening 
that it gave the impression China was prepared for mutual 
destruction, with Britain, Hong Kong, and itself all going down 
the tube. In doing so, the Chinese only succeeded in turning 
public opinion strongly against them. Even as public approval of 
Patten slipped and opposition rose, anti-Chinese feelings in 
Hong Kong also gained ground. Politically speaking, the Chinese 
paid dearly for opposing Patten. At the time the Chinese could 
convincingly attack Patten for his overbearing ways, arrogant, 
domineering, stubborn, and intractable. Now Patten has changed 
his attitudes. He may still be impenetrably thick-headed, but he 
has mellowed considerably and become more practical. What should 
be China's attitude now? If the Chinese try to be as mellow and 
practical as Patten, that may be interpreted as a compromise. 
Yet if they persist in their shrill ways, they may lose points. 
  3. Patten's second annual report to the Legislative Council 
is replete with praises for the people of Hong Kong, for their 
accomplishments, and for the superiority of the Hong Kong 
system, calling it a miracle of human society. The report also 
contains endless comparisons with Britain, Australia, and the 
Netherlands, countries which the local people are familiar with. 
Of course this is the stock in trade of politicians in every 
democratic country, but it also shows that the relationship 
between the ruler and the ruled under a democratic system is 
just what the people of Hong Kong need psychologically at this 
point in time. 
  Having inherited the tradition of the Qing Dynasty and the 
Republic of China, the Chinese Communists have always considered 
Hong Kong alien land. It is hard for the Chinese to sing the 
praises of the Hong Kong system, Hong Kong people, and Hong Kong 
society. During the anti-Patten campaign last year, the Chinese 
opposed everything that was associated with Patten. What Patten 
said about Hong Kong's values and its superiority were all 
satirized by the Chinese media, so much so that one could hardly 
tell right from wrong anymore. The "anti-Patten" campaign came 
perilously close to being an "anti-Hong Kong" movement. The 
objective of the Chinese was to launch an all-out attack on 
Patten, stopping at nothing. In so doing, however, they in 
effect repudiated many of the values of the system of Hong Kong. 
If China continues its negative attitude toward Hong Kong, what 
sort of price will it have to pay? If, on the other hand, it 
echoes Patten and begins heaping praises on Hong Kong and 
emulating the Hong Kong system, can the Chinese Government bring 
itself to do that? Would praising Hong Kong send a wrong message 
to the local people, misleading them into thinking that China 
would compromise with Patten and go along with him? Would that 
encourage "Hong Kong chauvinism?" 
  4. Patten has modified his political reform proposals in two 
major ways. First, he has replaced functional groups with 
statutory bodies even as he insists that voting be based on the 
individual and reduces the overall number of voters from the 
2.70 million called for last year to 1 million. The second 
concession is that the electoral committee would be composed of 
four groups following the organizational model of the second 
legislative council after 1997 as spelled out in the Basic Law. 
Under Patten's original proposal, the committee was to be made 
up of popularly elected district representatives (in its 
entirety or to a large extent). Nevertheless, Patten sticks by 
his original plan to have the 400 members of the electoral 
committee be chosen through election. Moreover, this concession 
comes with strings attached; the proposal that elected 
representatives be allowed to serve out their terms beyond 1997 
(the "through train" concept) is part and parcel of his overall 
plan. 
  Britain and China reopened negotiations in April mainly 
because public opinion forced them back to the conference table. 
Both sides knew full well the price of defying public wishes. 
They may not reach an agreement if they negotiate, but they are 
bound to lose if they don't even talk. Hong Kong people hope 
that something will come out of their talks. A dozen or so 
public opinion surveys by the Hong Kong Statistical and Business 
Research Council invariably came up with one finding: The people 
of Hong Kong want both sides to make concessions and reach an 
accord. Now that Patten has made the first move by taking the 
initiative to give way, naturally the public wants the Chinese 
side to make corresponding concessions in order to narrow the 
difference between the two sides. How should the Chinese 
Government respond? If they continue to insist that Patten is 
guilty of the "three violations" and refuse to make adjustments 
and concessions, they would have a lot of ideological work to do 
on the Hong Kong people, besides giving Patten a reason to 
withdraw from the talks. However, if they give way, they would 
be handing a victory to Patten. Patten's initial demand was an 
electorate of 2.7 million people. It has now been scaled back to 
1 million, still significantly more than the 200,000-300,000 
people who would have been eligible to cast votes for the 
original 21 functional seats. How extensive a concession should 
the Chinese make? What about the "through train" proposal? As 
the seven letters between the foreign ministers indicate, both 
sides agreed that the same electoral arrangements should remain 
in place from 1995 through 1999, allowing legislators elected in 
1995 to serve out their terms through 1999. Then came the 4 June 
tragedy of 1989 and the big victories scored by democratic 
groups in direct Legislative Council elections in 1991. The 
Chinese wavered on the "through train" idea and the British came 
up with their own set of arrangements for the 1995 elections. 
Since the controversy was triggered off by China's plan to scrap 
the "through train" proposal, would it make concessions on this 
very issue? 
  5. Patten's second annual report to the Legislative Council 
was an honest self-examination of his past commitments regarding 
the people's livelihood and the work that had been done. He 
talked about things he had accomplished and things he had not, 
laying it all out in an honest, earnest, and realistic way. One 
year after arriving in Hong Kong, Patten has certainly commanded 
much authority with his solid political ideas. More than that, 
his skills, language, and operating method as a politician as 
well as the closeness between him and the public have also set a 
standard that the leader of the post-1997 special administrative 
region [SAR] must meet. During the subsequent question period, 
Legislative Council members lined up to point out the errors in 
his report. Their exchange, complete with questions, answers, 
charges, and explanations, was democracy in action, live. 
  Public statements by Chinese officials to this date still 
contain a lot of empty bureaucratic gobbledygook, devoid of a 
spirit of seeking truth from facts. They always lecture the 
masses on the omnipotence, all-knowingness, invincibility, 
infallibility, and greatness of government, instead of talking 
about self-restraint, self-discipline, and self-control. The 
real issues are never aired in the open. Patten demonstrates the 
modern Western political approach while the Chinese remain 
wedded to propagating the superiority of "big, complete, and 
all-powerful government" going back thousands of years. How 
should the Chinese respond to Patten's new methods indicative of 
a modern open society? Should they throw a tantrum and pick a 
fight with Patten over this? Or should they take a leaf from 
Patten's book and try to communicate with the masses using 
similar methods? Would the SAR chief after 1997 measure up to 
Patten's standard? After the June 4 incident, Deng Xiaoping 
raised a lot of expectations when he said that he would "get 
several practical things done." Yet no documents have ever been 
issued regarding the "practical issue." Have they really 
materialized? Patten makes endless allusions to what is good 
about the Hong Kong system and what is bad about the Chinese 
system, one obvious example being the way the two governments 
level with the people. Even more striking is the open dialogue 
and debate that took place in an atmosphere of freedom between 
Patten and the people of Hong Kong on an equal plane after the 
governor presented his second annual report (in which the 
Chinese authorities also played an active part). 
  6. For the first time, Patten devoted an entire chapter to 
Sino-British relations. He spent a lot of time emphasizing the 
close ties between China and Hong Kong and the numerous 
connections between the two, including cooperation in 
administrative matters and environmental protection. In the 
future, bridges of the concrete and steel variety will be built 
to link the two together. Even more important will be bridges of 
the invisible type. Sino-Hong Kong relations mean China learning 
from Hong Kong's value system and success story and Hong Kong 
drawing support form China's strengths. Patten said, "When many 
places in the world identify with Hong Kong's value system and 
seek to duplicate its success story, would the world become a 
better place, a more prosperous place? Or will it become less 
prosperous? We all know the answers to these questions." 
(Section 182) Patten took the initiative to define the relations 
between China and Hong Kong, giving substance to their contacts 
as well as clarifying the nature of such relations. Hong Kong 
represents progress and as such should be imitated; China 
represents power and should therefore be a source of support for 
Hong Kong to tap into. Together they can take bold strides into 
the next century. 
  China has always looked at Hong Kong unilaterally from top 
to 
bottom, demanding that it fall in line with China and not the 
other way round. The kind of Sino-Hong Kong relations China 
wants is one in which Hong Kong complies with all China's orders 
and satisfies every Chinese demand. Whatever the merits of the 
case, no matter who represents progress and who represents 
backwardness, the Chinese want Hong Kong to simply blend itself 
into the entity known as China. As for making the Hong Kong 
system "living, automatic, and autonomous," the relations 
between China and the special entity of Hong Kong, how the two 
should be integrated and to what extent, as well as the costs 
and benefits of such integration... none of that has been 
considered at length. Nor do the Chinese allow such 
consideration; mention differences between the two systems and 
they cry "abetting," "sowing discord," "setting one party 
against another." A major incompatibility in Sino-Hong Kong 
relations is that the sovereign body, namely China, is large but 
backward, whereas Hong Kong, which has no sovereignty, is small 
but advanced. A unilateral emphasis on China's sovereignty would 
result in integration of a regressive type, meaning that an 
advanced Hong Kong would have to reach down to accommodate a 
backward China. A one-sided emphasis on Hong Kong's 
non-sovereign status is both impossible and disastrous. How to 
define Sino-Hong Kong relations down to the details is a major 
challenge facing Hong Kong in the future. The success or failure 
of this relationship will impact the relations between the 
mainland and Taiwan and those between the central government on 
the mainland and the localities (a perennial problem in Chinese 
politics going back thousands of years). 
  7. In his annual report to the Legislative Council, Patten 
noted subtly and not so subtly that where Hong Kong was free to 
make up its mind, things had gone well in the past year, but 
where consultation with China was necessary, nothing seemed to 
have worked well. In Section 172, he said. "...outstanding 
achievements have been scored on all fronts during the past 
year...with one lone exception," which was Hong Kong's effort to 
"further its understanding with China" and "replace unproductive 
speculation with sincere trust." (Section 173) Why? "Not because 
of a lack of effort, a lack of determination to improve 
bilateral relations on Hong Kong's part." (Section 174) "The 
reason is that we still have not been able to convince Chinese 
officials that Hong Kong citizens' expectations about the 
development of their political system are in no way excessive 
but are reasonable and should be met, that they form part of the 
natural evolution of a society as it matures and becomes more 
sophisticated. In a certain sense, political development is also 
a prerequisite for Hong Kong's remaining a leading player in 
international trade. These expectations do not constitute a 
threat to China now and will not do so in the future. The fact 
of the matter is that these expectations can be met within the 
framework of "one nation, two systems." (Section 175) Instead of 
saying the Chinese refused to go along or disagreed, Patten said 
euphemistically that they (meaning himself and his associates) 
had failed to convince Chinese officials. In fact his meaning is 
very clear. We all know what the problem is: The failure by the 
Chinese authorities to see what Patten and others have been able 
to see. Cases in point: Pier No. 9, the airport, the harbor, the 
Sino-British liaison group. Patten covered all these problems at 
great length and, in so doing, seemed to have put the ball back 
in China's court. 
  Last year the Chinese tried to shoot down Patten's political 
reform plan in an overbearing way by resorting to economic 
pressure, ready and willing to destroy all three parties. What 
the Chinese wanted to prove was that Patten would not be able to 
accomplish a thing without China's cooperation, that he would 
end up with not just one broken leg, but two broken legs. 
Basically the Chinese have achieved this goal. On the other 
hand, the Chinese were also taking a risk. The people of Hong 
Kong might blame the Chinese Government for the delay in solving 
all those problems that need to be tackled urgently. What are 
the Chinese going to do about these feelings? How to point the 
accusing finger back at the British? How to undo the damage the 
delay has caused Hong Kong and China (particularly Guangdong)? 
Who should be held politically accountable? In the second half 
of the year, will the Chinese continue to relax their economic 
austerity drive or will they tighten the belt again? [passage 
omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

