
<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-2898 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi050_w_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-050 </AU>
Document Type:Daily Report 
<DATE1>  21 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HONG KONG &amp; MACAO </F>
<F P=101> Hong Kong </F>
<H3> <TI>   Commentary Criticizes Patten `Asset' Theory </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  HK2302072594 Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 21 Feb 94 p A10 </F>
<F P=103> HK2302072594 </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong WEN WEI PO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special commentary" by Yu Yen (0205 6056): "Playing the </F>
`International Card' Is of No Avail--Commenting on Chris 
Patten's `International Asset' Theory"] 
  [Text] Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten returned to Hong 
Kong in a huff after spending his holidays and making several 
visits in Australia. In an interview with the media on the last 
day of his stay in Australia, he went so far as to say that 
Chinese officials do not understand the international status and 
importance of Hong Kong so their criticism of him does not 
conform to reality, adding that Hong Kong is an "international 
asset" as well as China's asset. 
  What is the purpose of Chris Patten's trip to Australia? 
Though he repeatedly argued in his defense that he did not go 
to Australia in search of support for his constitutional 
package, the fact he talked a great deal about his 
constitutional package and requested Australia to pass on 
"genuine democracy" to Hong Kong reveals that he visited 
Australia to seek international support for this constitutional 
package, of which the first part will be put to the vote, after 
his constitutional package had drawn sharp criticism and came in 
for questioning at the British Parliamentary Foreign Affairs 
Committee hearings. The Australian Government and public, 
however, gave him and his constitutional package the cold 
shoulder and many media units and Chinese organizations even 
severely criticized him. Only one or two government officers, 
who do not know anything about the Sino-British Joint 
Declaration and the Basic Law, supported him verbally. When 
commenting on this, a Chinese official pointed out: While Patten 
is playing the international card, it is extremely inappropriate 
for Australian Government officials to make irresponsible 
remarks. This criticism hit the vital spot. In reponse, Patten 
showed his ignorance and arrogance, once again proving that the 
British Government is bent on making the Hong Kong issue an 
international one before evacuating Hong Kong and changing Hong 
Kong into an independent or semi-independent political entity, 
to extend the influence of its colonial rule. 
<H5>  Sovereignty Over Hong Kong Cannot Be Evaded </H5>
  Ostensibly, some people feel Governor Patten's remarks, 
quoted at the beginning of this article, were made in praise of 
Hong Kong and in defense of Hong Kong's international status and 
its importance. However, a rough analysis shows the matter is 
not so simple. In saying Hong Kong is an international asset, 
Patten intentionally evaded the problem of to whom Hong Kong 
belongs. According to Patten, since Hong Kong is an 
"international asset," it belongs to the international 
community, namely, it is shared by every country in the world or 
at least it is an independent or semi-independent political 
entity, over which China cannot exercise sovereignty. Does this 
not clearly show that China's sovereignty over Hong Kong was 
evaded or even denied? 
  How can China's sovereignty over Hong Kong be evaded! Since 
ancient times Hong Kong has been an inseparable part of Chinese 
territory. This is a fact known to all. Hong Kong was "ceded" 
and "leased" by the corrupt Qing Government to the "Great 
British Empire" when the latter sent in overpowering warships 
and cannons in its invasion of China, so it was in fact "stolen" 
or forcibly "occupied" by Britain. 
  Though Britain has ruled over Hong Kong for one and a half 
centuries, the fact that Hong Kong is China's sacred territory 
will never change. The Chinese nation has gone through a good 
deal, so the Chinese people value the country's sovereignty all 
the more. The Chinese Government and people have never 
acknowledged the unequal treaty signed at the point of a 
bayonet. It is for this reason that Deng Xiaoping has said on 
many occasions: "China refuses to yield an inch on the 
territory problem. To put it bluntly, sovereignty is not a 
problem for discussion." These sonorous and forceful remarks 
most vividly highlight and express the common desire of the 
Chinese people, including Hong Kong compatriots. 
<H5>  Attempt To Turn Hong Kong into International Wrestling Ring </H5>
  Before the Chinese people, who refuse to be bullied again, 
Patten's attempt to evade and deny the fact that Hong Kong 
belongs to China by saying Hong Kong is an "international asset" 
is of no avail. 
  What merits attention is that this was not the first time 
Patten has referred to Hong Kong as an "international asset." 
In early May last year, he openly alleged that Hong Kong was an 
"international asset" in a speech in Washington. To echo this 
assertion, British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said in both 
Singapore and Jakarta last July that Hong Kong had become a 
"political city." The two used different terms but they meant 
the same thing. They tried to change Hong Kong into an 
international political wrestling ring in a bid to throw Hong 
Kong into confusion, cripple Hong Kong's superiority as an 
international financial center, and rely on international forces 
to prevent China regaining sovereignty over Hong Kong. 
  Patten's allegation that the Chinese side does not 
understand Hong Kong's "international status" is entirely 
nonsense. How can Patten be compared with the Chinese Government 
where the understanding of Hong Kong's international status and 
its importance are concerned. It is because the Chinese 
Government has a profound and accurate understanding of Hong 
Kong's past and present state, and its international status, 
that it was able to advance a series of principles and policies 
including "one country, two systems," "allowing Hong Kong people 
to administer Hong Kong and enjoy a high degree of autonomy," 
and so on to solve Hong Kong problems. The fact that the 
Chinese Government included the series of principles and 
policies into the Sino-British Joint Declaration, which was made 
known to the world, giving them concrete form and putting them 
on a legal basis in the Basic Law, vividly indicates that the 
Chinese Government has a penetrating understanding of Hong 
Kong's "international status." Undoubtedly, a city's 
international status and functions are entirely different from 
the issue of to which country it belongs. They are different 
concepts and cannot be lumped together. Hong Kong is ranked 
among the biggest international cities and has become one of the 
international economic, trade, financial, and shipping centers 
but this will never change the fact that it is part of Chinese 
territory. The same is ture of New York, Paris, and Tokyo: 
They are international big cities but nobody can deny that they 
belong to the United States, France, and Japan respectively. 
  Clearly Patten has an axe to grind in preaching the 
"international asset" theory. By falsely alleging that the 
Chinese side does not understand Hong Kong's international 
status, he obviously was trying to shift public attention, cheat 
the media, and lure the international community into meddling in 
Hong Kong affairs, thus finally attaining the goal of 
internationalizing the Hong Kong issue. 
<H3>  The British Side Has Attempted To Prolong Colonial Rule for 
a Long Time </H3>
  Internationalizing the Hong Kong issue is one of the British 
Government's important plans to continue its colonial rule over 
Hong Kong after 1997 and is also one of its concentrated 
examples of going back on its word after signing the 
Sino-British Joint Declaration. 
  Britain has been unhappy, unconscious, and even unwilling to 
return Hong Kong to China. At the beginning they said "the 
three treaties remain effective," later they suggested 
"exchanging sovereignty for administrative power," and then they 
proposed "Sino- British joint administration." All these showed 
their reluctance to give up colonial rule and return Hong Kong 
to China. 
  Former British Prime Minister Mrs Thatcher laid bare in her 
memoirs Britain's three-step strategy for handling the Hong Kong 
issue. First, insisting that Britain enjoy sovereignty over a 
part of Hong Kong; second, exchanging sovereignty over Hong Kong 
for long-term administrative power; and third, developing a 
democratic structure with the aim of granting Hong Kong 
independence or autonomy in a short period in the same way they 
treated Singapore, if the above two steps proved unworkable. 
  Before the Chinese people, who had risen to their feet, the 
first two steps have gone to the wall, so they are now stepping 
up implementation of the third step by taking advantage of their 
administrative power. People are now clear that everything, 
including the "representative government system," "the right of 
abode in the United Kingdom," the "formation of the court of 
final appeal," and "introducing the committee system into the 
Legislative Council" was closely related with to the third step. 
What Patten has said and done since he arrived in Hong Kong, 
including the "international card," has been designed to 
meticulously carry through the third step laid down by the 
British Government. This is exactly what is meant by the 
Chinese saying: He who has come, has come with ill intent, 
certainly not on virtue bent. This is the soft tactic Britain, 
which was a great empire over 100 years ago but is now on the 
wane, is forced to apply when it can no longer be insufferably 
arrogant before the giant in the east--the powerful People's 
Republic of China. According to Percy Cradock's memoirs, Mrs 
Thatcher once spoke of the need to appoint a politician as the 
last Hong Kong governor. This was because only a politician can 
achieve a certain political objective; can be impudent and break 
his promises; can contradict himself and chop and change; and 
can stop at nothing and risk danger in his desperation to carry 
out his plan. Patten has acted this way since he came to Hong 
Kong. Therefore, Patten's behavior is not personal but reflects 
a change in Britain's policy toward Hong Kong. 
  If anyone says Mr Patten has loafed around and wandered 
about 
doing nothing since he arrived in Hong Kong, this is unfair. 
Over the last two years, making nothing of the hardships, he 
has traveled to many countries to enlist support for his 
constitutional package in a move to internationalize the Hong 
Kong issue. During his recent trip to Australia, apart from 
saying that Hong Kong was an "international asset," he claimed 
that for various countries to support Hong Kong in expanding 
democracy is not equivalent to interfering in China's internal 
affairs. He also called on the international community to see 
to it that China honor its commitment after 1997 and alleged 
that Britain bears a "moral responsibility" for Hong Kong, and 
so on. All this thoroughly exposes Britain's plan to 
internationalize the Hong Kong issue. 
  Nevertheless, it is internationally accepted that while the 
Hong Kong issue is a matter for both China and Britain before 
1997, it is purely a Chinese internal affair after 1997. So any 
attempts by Patten and Britain to make the Hong Kong issue an 
international one are doomed to failure. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

