
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT922-10026</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CEEBIAAIFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920505
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  05 MAY 92 / Survey of Hong Kong (1):  On course for the transfer - Hong
Kong is thriving as it prepares for reversion to Chinese sovereignty in
1997. Business confidence has returned, tourism has revived and a huge
airport project is under construction.  Simon Holberton examines the mood in
the colony awaiting the arrival of a new governor in July
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SIMON HOLBERTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WHEN Mr Chris Patten, Hong Kong's newly-appointed governor, arrives in the
colony in July he will find that, five years away from its reversion to
Chinese sovereignty, Hong Kong is thriving. Just a year ago the colony was
in the doldrums: a bitter fight with China over colonial government's plans
to build a huge airport was under way; the Gulf War had depressed tourist
arrivals; and the colony's first partially democratic elections were
looming.
Yet, in a way which underlines the skittish, manic depressive nature of the
place, business confidence is now at it highest level for three years. The
'airport problem' was solved with Mr John Major, Britain's prime minister,
going to Beijing last September to sign the deal; tourism has picked up;
and, more importantly, southern China's economic expansion, which continues
at an exceptional pace, has come to dominate local business sentiment.
In one year share prices on the Hong Kong stock exchange have risen by
nearly 40 per cent; so, too, have property prices. These singular rises in
asset prices - aided, to be sure, by a lax monetary policy  - underline the
brimming optimism of Hong Kong. The colony expects to grow by more than 5
per cent in real terms this year, after a 4 per cent real expansion in 1991,
and nearly 3 per cent in 1990.
To judge by the stock market, property prices, and bilateral trade with and
investment in China, Hong Kong appears to have come to terms with its future
ruler. The economic integration of Hong Kong with China is, considering that
it has occurred just over the past 10 years, nothing short of astonishing.
This integration is most visible in the way Hong Kong's trade has changed
over the past six years. During that time Hong Kong has reverted to a role
it occupied before the Second World War: that of entrepot for China's trade
with the outside world.
Last year, Hong Kong exported goods with a value of HKDollars 765.8bn; of
these HKDollars 534.8 were 're-exports', more than 80 per cent of which
related to trade with China. But for the re-export trade, Hong Kong would
have a visible trade deficit with the rest of the world because it is
becoming more of a service area and transferring some of its manufacturing
to south China.
The change in trade flows has had a corresponding impact on the colony's
economy. Manufacturing's share of gross domestic product and employment has
fallen, while the service sector - trade processing, communications,
shipping - has grown.
This change in Hong Kong's economy could not have happened without the
historic change of course China embarked upon in 1979. Deng Xiaoping,
China's paramount leader, opened the country's door and Hong Kong's
entrepreneurs rushed in.
Today, Hong Kong's factory owners in Guangdong - the Chinese province
bordering the colony - employ between 2m and 3m workers; Hong Kong supplies
China with an estimated 40 per cent of its foreign exchange earnings by
virtue of Chinese goods flowing through the colony, earnings of mainland
companies in the colony and remittances by local people to families still in
China; and, Hong Kong is the source of 60 per cent of foreign investment in
China.
Yet, in spite of the extraordinary economic integration that has taken place
over the past decade, China, at a political level, divides Hong Kong society
and politics. Come June 30, 1997, Hong Kong will be welcomed back into the
bosom of a country which, at best, nurtures ancient attitudes to civil and
political rights, and which for millennia has been ruled by an iron fist.
Although the Joint Declaration on Hong Kong's future which Britain and China
signed in September 1984 and the Basic Law which the Chinese parliament
passed in April 1991 provide for the maintenance of Hong Kong's way of life
and a 'high degree of autonomy', the colony's citizens have continued to
vote with their feet, seeking the protection of foreign lands and the
passports they offer.
There have been cases of Hong Kong Chinese returning to the colony but this
is hardly surprising given that their most popular destinations - Canada,
the US and Australia - have all been suffering economic downturns. Bored and
under-employed they have returned with their insurance policy - their
passport  - tightly gripped.
They have come back to a growing economy and to a place where last
September's elections for the Legislative Council have changed the political
landscape. Politics is no longer conducted in clubs but now in full public
view. The government, in the past rarely held accountable for its decisions,
now finds it has to make a case for its policies, from bus fares to
taxation. It faces a continual barrage of complaints from elected
representatives and pressure groups.
The government finds itself caught between forces pulling in opposite
directions. On the one hand there is a group of local,
democratically-elected politicians who implicitly challenge the colonial
government's legitimacy. They, having been elected, claim a right to have
their policies taken seriously and adopted.
On the other, in a curious reversal of fortune, is Beijing. It is keen that
the government retains its position of dominance - because it wants the
post-1997 government to inherit that dominance - and snarls each time the
colonial regime appears to accede to local demands.
Somewhere in the middle is a group of largely appointed politicians,
generally of the conservative stripe, some of whom sit in the legislature
and on the governor's Executive Council, or cabinet. They wish to retain
Hong Kong's free-wheeling capitalist system, are suspicious of their elected
brethren whom, they claim with some justice, wish to spend the colony's
wealth before it is earned. This group also seeks a non-confrontational
policy towards China, believing that it is better to work with the future
ruler than to antagonise it.
Mr Patten will have to chart his course carefully. Broadening political
representation in his cabinet is one not entirely risk-free way, but is an
option which if skilfully handled could repay handsome domestic dividends.
If successful it could take a lot of the rancour out of domestic politics.
In drawing the sting, however, from the domestic body politic he risks
inserting it into the tender hide of China. Beijing has already begun to
agitate on electoral reform; Mr Patten can expect more.
Beijing wants an extra seat in the 1995 legislature for its Hong Kong
business association, via one of the nine new 'functional constituencies' -
'rotten boroughs' by another name. This may prove a useful bargaining chip
for him to cash in, in the ensuing contest over electoral reform.
Yet Mr Patten's main task is to preside over the peaceful transfer of Hong
Kong to China in 1997. His key point of contact on the Chinese side will be
Mr Zhou Nan, the head of Beijing's unofficial embassy in the colony. A man
neither popular with his staff nor with the people of Hong Kong, Mr Zhou has
proved difficult for the British to deal with since his appointment after
the Tiananmen massacre of June 1989.
In the absence, however, of a replacement to match the new governor's
seniority, Mr Patten will have to deal with him as best he can. He will also
have to deal with Mr Lu Ping, head of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office
of the State Council, and China's most senior official in charge of
day-to-day Hong Kong Affairs.
Mr Patten, with help from London, will have to give a kick-start to
proceedings within the Joint Liaison Group - the Anglo-Chinese forum in
which issues regarding the transition are decided. Although much was
achieved by the outgoing governor Lord Wilson, the list of what needs to be
done is daunting. Mr Patten will have to marshal all his considerable
political skills to achieve a breakthrough.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 27
</PAGE>
</DOC>

