
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT944-5494</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-ELDARABQFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>941203
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  03 DEC 94 / 1,000 days of uncertainty: It is China that will call the
shots on the handover of Hong Kong
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By SIMON HOLBERTON and PETER MONTAGNON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Mr Philip Tose, the maverick Hong Kong financier, once offered Britain's
Tory party Pounds 5m to remove Mr Chris Patten, Hong Kong's governor. Now,
he says, it is too late to make any difference.
With the battle over electoral reform ended, and less than 1,000 days to go
before the handover on June 30 1997, the die is cast. Hong Kong has embarked
on the final leg of its journey back to Chinese rule. And most people in the
colony believe there is little Britain can do by way of new initiatives.
As the sense of change becomes palpable - with China's Citic taking the
British trading company Jardine Matheson's seat on the board of the powerful
Jockey Club, and Mandarin beginning to displace Cantonese on the government
radio - it is now up to China to decide how smooth the handover will be, and
the shape of life beyond.
Optimists suggest that Chinese officials are beginning to realise that they
need British co-operation. 'Mr Patten is the governor and the representative
of the Hong Kong British government,' says one senior Chinese official in
Hong Kong. 'We have to deal with him. On many points we don't agree with him
but he is the governor.'
Some concrete evidence of this new realism is the agreement Beijing reached
last month with Britain on the funding for Hong Kong's HKDollars 160bn
(Pounds 13bn) airport development. This has freed funds for building a
railway connecting the airport to urban Hong Kong.
Encouragement is also taken from reports that Mr Qian Qichen, China's
foreign minister, is considering a visit to Britain next year. And Chinese
officials in Hong Kong indicate a desire to deal with the nitty-gritty of
the transfer at a meeting of the Joint Liaison Group, a bilateral body with
Britain, this month.
But Hong Kong's passage from British colony to a 'special administrative
region' of China still seems likely to be dogged by controversy.
'While we are totally sincere in wanting to be co-operative and
constructive, the nature of an enterprise as complicated as this makes it
very difficult to see circumstances in which there are not going to be any
more arguments,' says Mr Patten. 'What I hope is that we will make progress
in other areas which could avoid arguments becoming too poisonous and
seeping into everything.'
The chief obstacle to a smooth transition is the possibility of an exodus of
the senior civil servants, who have managed the colony with a light and
sophisticated touch. 'The biggest problem that Hong Kong faces is the
stability and continuity of the civil service,' says Mr Allen Lee, the
leader of the pro-business Liberal party.
Mr Lee says that, 'in general, Hong Kong people are still fearful of the
Communist party'. This is especially so among senior civil servants who will
have most day-to-day contact with representatives of the new sovereign power
after 1997. Many have come into close contact with mainland officials and
been subjected to humiliating treatment.
The importance of morale among the colony's 180,000 civil servants is
acknowledged by Chinese officials. Some, with a hint of desperation in their
voices, note that only the top 20 to 30 jobs will require vetting by
Beijing. 'The ones below . . . we hope these civil servants will stay,' says
one official. 'We need them; they have made a great contribution to Hong
Kong.'
It is hard to see how Beijing's desire to maintain a tight grip on the
levers of power can be meshed with the traditional independence and
professionalism of Hong Kong's civil service.
The transfer of sovereignty is full of seemingly innocuous details that turn
out to be traps for the unwary. Take school text books, which have recently
emerged as an issue because some pro-Beijing figures in Hong Kong do not
believe that the current texts used in schools are sufficiently 'patriotic'.
'We are not suggesting any change to the curriculum,' says Mr Tsang Yok
Sing, a leading Beijing adviser in Hong Kong who is himself a school
headmaster. 'We sent a selection of textbooks to Beijing and they were
shocked . . . by references to Taiwan as the Republic of China, the People's
Republic as a neighbour, and the glossing over of Britain's role in the
Opium War.'
Text books for the 1997/98 school year have to be ordered by the end of
1996. Already some publishers have said they may withdraw from the textbook
market. Given the high status accorded to education in Chinese society this
is a potentially explosive issue for Beijing if not handled sensitively.
Equally it is unclear quite what Britain can do to ease the situation.
But it is the absence of what is known as the through train that may prove
the most debilitating factor of all. The through train encapsulated the hope
that those elected in 1995 to the Legislative Council (LegCo), Hong Kong's
60-member law making body, would be able to serve their full four-year term,
regardless of the 1997 handover.
After the dispute on electoral reform, Beijing announced that it would
dismiss the 1995 LegCo once China resumed sovereignty of Hong Kong, and
replace it with a provisional legislature.
This decision is set to take Hong Kong into uncharted waters, and casts
doubt over the continuity of the colony's legal system.
The colonial government had planned to hand over by introducing a piece of
midnight legislation to eliminate all references in Hong Kong law to
institutions such as the governor and the Queen. But China says an
illegitimate 1995 LegCo cannot pass laws binding a future government.
However, the Basic Law - the China-drafted mini-constitution for post-1997
Hong Kong - does not provide for a provisional legislature as such, although
it does foresee a 'preparatory committee' to be formed in 1996 that will
determine who sits in this legislature.
Mr Tsang, a member of the Chinese government committee planning for the
handover, says the provisional legislature will have full powers to make
laws for an expected term of nine to 12 months.
'It's an extremely dangerous thing to have because they (Beijing) can clean,
with one sweep, any laws they don't like,' says Ms Anna Wu, an appointed
member of LegCo and a lawyer specialising in intellectual property law.
It seems likely that the committee to which Mr Tsang belongs, the
preliminary working committee, will become the 1996 preparatory committee.
That body may well elect from among itself the 60 members of the provisional
legislature.
Next year's elections will still matter, however. A strong showing by Hong
Kong's pro-democracy groups, led by Mr Martin Lee's Democratic party, will
be seen as a protest vote against Beijing. But a good showing by Beijing's
own supporters will create another problem: China would then have to decide
whether to accept an elected council favourable to its point of view.
Some take this prospect seriously. Mr Tsang says of the final
recommendations of the provisional legislature: 'I think it most likely that
any substantial conclusion will be deferred until after next year's
elections to see how things are.'
For Mr Patten, the cost of confronting China over the 1995 elections has
been high.
Even his supporters see him as a spent force. 'I think the governor has
become very stuck,' says Ms Wu, a Patten appointee. 'I can't see him
challenging the Chinese again over any other major issue. He will go for a
conciliatory, appeasement path,' she says, in the run up to the handover.
His critics go much further, suggesting that there is little chance of any
meaningful dialogue while Mr Patten occupies government house. 'At least one
senior Chinese official has said to me he believes there is no change of
restoring co-operation and trust unless and until we have a new governor,'
says Mr Tsang.
Mr Patten is adamant that he is not leaving Hong Kong until he has
discharged his duty. But it remains in China's gift to make Mr Patten a
player in the discussions on the transfer.
China's supporters in the colony claim that Mr Patten's policy is now to
make Hong Kong harder to govern by 'loosening the screws' before the British
leave. This is a reference to the repeal of some of the colony's more
repressive pieces of legislation, such as the power to censor films. Britain
used such ordinances to control Hong Kong but does not want to leave them on
the statute books for the incoming regime.
There is similar wariness among Chinese officials about the possibility that
Britain may lay down financial obligations which only have to be met after
1997.
Mr Zhou Nan, the most senior representative of the Chinese Communist party
and government in Hong Kong, recently attacked Mr Patten's plans for a
government-funded pension, saying: 'During the transition period, we should
not casually transplant a costly Euro-socialist pay-as-you-go concept to
Hong Kong without prudently taking into consideration similar western
programmes' long-standing track record of grossly under-estimating
liabilities and grossly over-estimating funding projections.'
Mr Patten claims that by 1997 public spending in Hong Kong as a percentage
of GDP will be lower than it was in 1982 - the year Britain began handover
negotiations with China. 'I don't think Hong Kong needs lectures on how to
run an economy or how to control public spending,' he says.
But this kind of debate is being increasingly overshadowed by the
realisation that the transition will be far from smooth.
One Chinese banker says: 'Hong Kong will become less free; more like
Singapore. There will be less freedom, but that's to be expected. The law
will become less important and personal contacts more important. There will
also be more corruption. These won't be immediate changes but will happen
over time. We will just have to get used to it.' In Mrs Wu's view: 'There is
no absolute guarantee for Hong Kong that the 1984 Sino-British joint
declaration will be met. The real issue is: how easy will it be (for China)
to break? 'One country two systems' is a political idea, not one that is
built on firm juridical foundations.'
</TEXT>
<XX>
Countries:-
</XX>
<CN>CNZ  China, Asia.
    HKZ  Hong Kong, Asia.
    GBZ  United Kingdom, EC.
</CN>
<XX>
Industries:-
</XX>
<IN>P9721 International Affairs.
</IN>
<XX>
Types:-
</XX>
<TP>CMMT  Comment &amp; Analysis.
</TP>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 6
</PAGE>
</DOC>

