
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910702-0086
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910702-0086.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   The Marshall Seat:
   Bush's Court Nominee,
   A Black Republican,
   Is Deft Political Choice
   ---
   Conservatives Laud Thomas;
   Liberals May Be Hard Put
   To Mount a Strong Attack
   ---
   Grandson of a Sharecropper
   ----
   By Stephen Wermiel and Paul M. Barrett
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
                                                                                                       

</HL>
<DATE>
07/02/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<IN>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<NS>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)
</NS>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
SUPREME COURT (SUP)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- By choosing Clarence Thomas, a conservative
black federal judge, for the Supreme Court, President Bush
may have defused a fierce political battle over the high
court's shift to the right.
   Judge Thomas, who has been sitting on the federal appeals
court in Washington for just 14 months, won't be confirmed
without a fight in the Senate focusing on his inexperience on
the bench and his strong opposition to affirmative action.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But barring damaging unforeseen revelations about Judge
Thomas, Democrats will have a hard time mounting a
broad-based campaign against the affable 43-year-old, who is
smart, tough and speaks powerfully about overcoming racism
and poverty in the deep South.
   "Anybody who takes him on in the area of civil rights is
taking on the grandson of a sharecropper," observes
conservative Republican Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah.
   Judge Thomas's nomination yesterday got a restrained
reaction from many Senate Democrats. Civil rights groups,
too, said they will have to study his record, both in his
brief tenure on the appeals court and as chairman of the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission during the Reagan
administration.
   Mr. Bush's choice is a bold political move, coming in the
midst of the current debate over civil rights legislation and
quotas. The president has nominated a man who would be not
merely the second black to serve on the Supreme Court, but a
man who embodies the ideal of personal achievement rather
than reliance on government programs for a leg up.
   The choice also will put Democrats on the defensive: Judge
Thomas draws praise even from some liberals. "He has been a
very good colleague," says Chief Judge Abner Mikva of the
appeals court here, a former Democratic congressman.
Moreover, Democrats specifically urged the president to
consider appointing a minority-group member to fill the
vacancy that was created when Thurgood Marshall announced his
retirement last Thursday.
   Judge Thomas's association with moderate Republican Sen.
John Danforth of Missouri, for whom he worked after his
graduation from Yale Law School in 1974, will also weigh in
his favor. Mr. Danforth's support will help reassure many
moderate Senate Democrats and Republicans, much as New
Hampshire GOP Sen. Warren Rudman's sponsorship of David
Souter did after President Bush nominated him last July.
   While liberals will focus on Judge Thomas's legal
inexperience, his record on the bench doesn't present them
with the sort of target they had with the articulated,
sharply conservative legal views of Robert Bork, whose
Supreme Court nomination was defeated in 1987.
   A number of Senate Democrats, including Judiciary Chairman
Joseph Biden of Delaware, stressed when Judge Thomas was
confirmed for the appeals court that he would face tougher
scrutiny if he were nominated for the Supreme Court. But that
will be a difficult position to defend in light of Mr.
Thomas's success last year in deflecting liberal criticism.
   Judge Thomas's strong opposition to affirmative action and
the abortion debate will be grist for his confirmation
hearings. "I don't know where Judge Thomas stands on a
woman's right to choose, but I intend to find out," said
Democratic Sen. Howard Metzenbaum of Ohio, who was the lone
opponent last year in the Senate Judiciary Committee's
12-to-1 approval of his appeals court nomination. "Women have
a right to know whether Judge Thomas is committed to
protecting their fundamental rights."
   Abortion-rights groups are also likely to be concerned
about the fact that Judge Thomas is a Catholic who spent a
year in a Missouri seminary in the 1960s pondering the
priesthood. As other Supreme Court nominees have done,
however, Judge Thomas is likely to go to great lengths to
avoid committing himself on abortion, an issue that is
expected to come before the court again and again.
   The reaction from civil rights groups was muted. Ralph
Neas, executive director of the Leadership Conference on
Civil Rights, said, "With so many constitutional rights and
personal liberties at stake, the Senate must make sure
Clarence Thomas has demonstrated a commitment to equal
opportunity and equal justice under the law. . . . We urge
the Senate not to rush to judgment."
   To friends and colleagues of Judge Thomas, his own life
story is the most compelling thing about him. With Justice
Marshall's retirement, civil rights advocates worried that
there would no longer be anyone on the court who had
experienced racial segregation. Though Judge Thomas may not
find favor with those groups, the fact is that he knew
nothing but segregation as he grew up outside Savannah, Ga.,
in the 1950s.
   Born into rural poverty, he lived in a house with no
bathroom until he was seven years old. His father left when
he was young, and his mother sent him to live with his
grandparents.
   The grandparents raised him with strict discipline,
instilling in him a strong work ethic, and sent him to an
all-black Catholic school run by white nuns. Yesterday,
speaking at a news conference at President Bush's home in
Kennebunkport, Maine, Mr. Thomas choked up when he talked
about his grandparents' influence. For a moment, it appeared
that he might not be able to finish his statement. He praised
them as well as "my mother and the nuns, all of whom were
adamant that I grow up to make something of myself."
   As a child, Judge Thomas said, "I could not dare dream
that I would ever see the Supreme Court, not to mention be
nominated to it. Indeed, my most vivid childhood memory of
the Supreme Court was the `Impeach Earl Warren' signs which
lined Highway 17 near Savannah. I didn't quite understand who
this Earl Warren fellow was, but I knew he was in some kind
of trouble."
   The first person in his family to attend college, Judge
Thomas spent a year at Immaculate Conception Seminary in
Conception Junction, Mo., before transferring to Holy Cross
College in Worcester, Mass. After law school, he went to work
for Mr. Danforth, who was then Missouri's attorney general.
   After two years in the Monsanto Co. legal department,
Judge Thomas rejoined Mr. Danforth, by then a U.S. senator.
He then served for a year as chief of the U.S. Education
Department's civil rights office before President Reagan
appointed him chairman of the EEOC in 1982.
   His eight-year tenure at the EEOC was marked by
controversy. He changed the agency's approach to de-emphasize
settling large numbers of cases quickly, concentrating
instead on instances in which specific victims of
discrimination could be identified. In age discrimination,
particularly, that created case backlogs that distressed
advocates for senior citizens.
   Liberals charged that, across-the-board, the EEOC under
Mr. Thomas's leadership didn't aggressively attack civil
rights violations. "As chairman of the EEOC, Clarence Thomas
failed to demonstrate a commitment to civil rights and
liberties," says Nan Aron of the liberal Alliance for
Justice.
   But Mr. Thomas had strong views and didn't shrink from
expressing them. Rather, he seized every opportunity --
including writing letters to editors, op-ed page articles and
book reviews -- to attack affirmative action as patronizing
and as an ineffective remedy for discrimination. In a 1987
letter to The Wall Street Journal, he said, "I firmly insist
that the Constitution be interpreted in a colorblind fashion.
. . . I emphasize black self-help, as opposed to racial
quotas and other race-conscious legal devices that only
further and deepen the original problem."
   Since he has been on the federal bench, liberal and
conservative legal analysts agree, the relatively few
opinions he has written don't suggest a strong ideological
slant, although he has tended to rule for the government in
criminal cases and in business regulatory matters.
   One highly controversial case on which Judge Thomas sat
earlier this year has yet to be decided. A three-judge panel
of the appeals court is considering the constitutionality of
a Federal Communications Commission policy giving preference
to women for broadcast licenses. The others on the panel were
Judges Mikva and James Buckley, a conservative. The questions
are: Will Judge Thomas use the case to once again attack
affirmative action, and will that pour fuel on his
confirmation fight?
   Judge Thomas is well-liked by colleagues, both at the
EEOC, where the new headquarters building is named for him,
and at the appeals court.
   Ricky Silberman, a close friend who is vice chairman of
the EEOC and whose husband, Laurence, sits on the appeals
court, says: "He is a very simple person who loves to say he
was a farm boy and remains a farm boy." A sometime jogger and
weightlifter, he enjoys reading and listening to music
ranging from classical to his favorite, country singer George
Jones.
   For much of his tenure at the EEOC, Mr. Thomas was a
single parent, raising a son, Jamal. Some friends have
expressed concern that the bitterness of the divorce from his
first wife could spill over into his confirmation hearings.
His second wife, Virginia, a deputy assistant secretary at
the Labor Department, is white.
   In light of the administration's strong attack on racial
quotas in hiring, President Bush's selection of a black man
to fill Justice Marshall's seat brought questions about
whether he was in fact observing a quota on the court. In his
press conference, Mr. Bush strongly denied the very thought
of that, insisting that race wasn't a factor in the selection
of Judge Thomas.
   "The fact that he is black -- a minority -- has nothing to
do with this," the president said. "He is the best
qualified."
   Judge Thomas, who just turned 43 last week, would be the
youngest Supreme Court justice of the past 100 years with the
exception of William O. Douglas, who joined the court when he
was 40. Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on the Thomas
nomination are expected to be held in September. If they go
smoothly, Justice Thomas could be sworn in before the new
Supreme Court term begins on Oct. 7.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

