
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911204-0162
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911204-0162.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Sununu Quits as Bush's Chief of Staff;
   Ouster May Not Solve President's Woes
   ---
   Criticism From the Right
   Could be Exacerbated;
   Policy Shifts Unlikely
   ----
   By Michel McQueen and David Shribman
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/04/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18
</SO>
<CO>
   WNEWS
</CO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- John Sununu resigned as White House chief of
staff, ending his struggle to remain within President Bush's
inner circle.
   During a flight to Florida on Air Force One, the president
in effect forced the feisty chief of staff to submit his
resignation. The move comes at a time when Mr. Bush's
popularity ratings are slipping and he is under attack for
his handling of the economy.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But Mr. Sununu's removal may not solve the president's
immediate problems. Instead, it could exacerbate the
criticism from the right, where conservatives are
increasingly expressing their doubts about the president, and
where his renomination is under challenge. Moreover, Mr.
Sununu's ouster is unlikely to result in any major changes in
Mr. Bush's economic policies, which have attracted much
criticism recently.
   The nature of the final year of Mr. Bush's first term now
hinges on whom he picks to be his White House chief of staff
and whom he chooses to run his re-election campaign. One
high-ranking official said Transportation Secretary Samuel
Skinner is almost certain to get one of those two jobs --
probably the chief of staff position. Mr. Sununu previously
was offered the opportunity to switch jobs with Mr. Skinner,
administration officials say, but turned it down.
   Mr. Skinner has the advantage of an easy working
relationship with Mr. Bush and has been a respected political
adviser on issues beyond his transportation portfolio. He has
also developed a strong relationship with Vice President Dan
Quayle. Moreover, while Mr. Bush is under attack for lack of
attention to domestic policy, Mr. Skinner can claim credit
for shepherding major highway and mass transit legislation
through Congress.
   But conservatives complain Mr. Skinner is a pragmatist in
Mr. Bush's mold rather than a true conservative. In his first
year in office, for example, he angered conservatives by
declining to use his authority to relax fuel economy
standards for autos; more recently, he has vigorously fought
any tightening of those standards. Moreover, top Republicans
on Capitol Hill, as well as some administration officials,
say Mr. Skinner has a penchant for abrasiveness, although he
is hardly Mr. Sununu's equal on that score.
   Another person mentioned for the chief of staff post is
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney. Many prominent Republican
politicians as well as businessmen would love to see him get
the job. The defense secretary is widely credited for his
performance during the Persian Gulf War and is
well-remembered for his stint as chief of staff under Gerald
Ford a decade and a half ago. But the conservative defense
secretary has said he wouldn't take the job again under any
circumstances.
   Former Rep. Bill Frenzel, a close friend of the
president's, is also mentioned as a possible choice. And GOP
Sen. Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas called the president aboard
Air Force One yesterday and urged that Carla Hills, the U.S.
trade representative, be given the job.
   Mr. Sununu will leave his current post Dec. 15 and become
a special presidential counselor with cabinet rank until
March 1.
   The end of Mr. Sununu's reign at the White House came
without the blustery self-confidence that was the mark of the
governor's suzerainty. In the past several days the chief of
staff, who sometimes seemed to regard members of Congress as
his staff, and who regularly dismissed suggestions from
Republican political strategists, became a suitor rather than
an aggressor. He was almost desperately casting around for
support in the official Washington circles that he
disregarded only a few weeks ago.
   By the time he and the president agreed on his departure,
Mr. Sununu, who made self-confidence a badge of honor, was
despondent. Hours earlier, he had told confidantes that his
departure was assured. But even as he made telephone calls
around the country he was still seeking signs of support,
often from those he had spurned in office.
   The Sununu saga lasted so long in part because of his
survival instincts -- honed as much in the halls of academe
while a professor at Tufts University as in the austere state
house on a Concord hill. The former governor's extended
tenure also reflected the president's unwillingness to
dismiss people who have served him with loyalty. It was,
after all, Mr. Sununu who salvaged Mr. Bush's flagging GOP
nomination struggle in 1988, when he assembled an impressive
political organization that beat back both Sen. Robert Dole
of Kansas and the conventional political wisdom in the New
Hampshire primary.
   But while Mr. Sununu's resignation may have been
personally painful for Mr. Bush, the president apparently
decided it had become necessary to respond to mounting
criticism from both Democrats and Republicans for his
administration's handling of the country's economic problems,
and to increasing disquiet from his political advisers who
were concerned about his slippage in public opinion polls.
   Nevertheless, administration officials say it's unlikely
Mr. Sununu's departure will mean major changes in economic
strategy. Nor is it likely to please the White House's
conservative critics, who frequently relied on Mr. Sununu to
push their causes. Two influential GOP lawmakers, Rep. Henry
Hyde of Illinois and Rep. Vin Weber of Minnesota, even took
the unusual step of calling a news conference yesterday to
voice their support for him.
   But despite Mr. Sununu's ties to conservatives, he had in
recent months abandoned their economic agenda. One
administration official noted that Mr. Sununu was among those
who argued most strongly against reopening the fight over a
capital gains tax cut this year; he argued it would subject
Mr. Bush to unnecessary and unproductive political heat.
   Mr. Sununu, said the official, "is really more of a
pragmatist." Another administration official, however, said
Mr. Sununu's departure may force Mr. Bush to get more
involved in economic issues. Mr. Sununu had sometimes denied
access to officials who wished to talk to the president about
economic and domestic issues.
   One area where Mr. Sununu's influence was clearly felt was
abortion, where he held the administration to a stringent
antiabortion stance. Anti-abortion groups were among the
first to express regret over Mr. Sununu's departure.
   According to several adminstration officials, Mr. Sununu
also encouraged Mr. Bush to take a firm position on issues
where Mr. Bush had no strong views, such as vetoing
appropriations bills for the District of Columbia that
allowed it to use its own, locally generated funds for
abortions for poor women.
   As a result, Mr. Sununu became a favorite of many social
conservatives who distrusted Mr. Bush's roots in the moderate
wing of his party. His departure is likely to increase their
suspicions, unless Mr. Bush names a successor who is viewed
as a conservative.
   Mr. Sununu began to face rough political waters a year ago
when, as one of Mr. Bush's chief negotiators on the deficit
reduction agreement, he bruised congressional egos from both
political parties with heavy-handed lobbying and what many
saw as disregard for their stature as elected
representatives. Earlier this year he made headlines again
when his extensive use of government airplanes for political
and personal travel became public.
   The Sununu saga ended with a handwritten note to Mr. Bush
on a trip that Mr. Sununu knew would seal his fate.
   The White House said the chief of staff had offered to
resign in the Oval Office Monday, but the matter apparently
wasn't resolved. Mr. Sununu, according to associates close to
him, planned to confront the president on his trip yesterday,
asking him for an expression of 100% support to be made both
privately and to the White House press corps when Air Force
One returned to Washington.
   He knew that without that expression of full support, he
would have to depart.
   The president had already been searching for a way to ease
Mr. Sununu out of his post gracefully. That effort, however,
had faced formidable obstacles. The former governor was cool
to the idea of accepting a cabinet position even in the early
days of the Bush transition, and indicated that such a move
would be unacceptable now.
   At the same time, Republican political strategists
calculated that Mr. Sununu would be a liability in the
national campaign structure because of an abrasive operating
style that had alienated longtime Bush allies. And the
suggestion of dispatching him back home to New Hampshire to
run the re-election campaign was blocked when Mr. Bush
decided to have his campaign there run by former GOP Gov.
Hugh Gregg and his son, current Gov. Judd Gregg, both of whom
regard Mr. Sununu with suspicion.
   The Greggs, in fact, scheduled a meeting for this evening
in the governor's mansion to plan strategy for the New
Hampshire primary, where Mr. Bush faces a challenge from
conservative columnist Pat Buchanan. "It's a Gregg
operation," said a leading New Hampshire Republican.
   The announcement of Mr. Sununu's departure came in
Meridian, Miss., where the White House distributed
photocopies of the handwritten resignation letter.
Presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater didn't answer
reporters' questions.
   In his letter, Mr. Sununu hailed the "chemistry,
friendship, caring and irreverence" he encountered during his
tenure in the Oval Office.
   But the letter also contained elements of the traits that
led to his downfall. He seemed to indicate that Mr. Bush's
wishes had dictated the combative style that made him so many
enemies in Washington. He said he remained "ready to help . .
. in pit bull mode or pussycat mode (your choice, as
always)."
   The comment echoed the latest episode that had called Mr.
Sununu's effectiveness into question. Late last month, in a
television interview, Mr. Sununu suggested that President
Bush had erred by ad-libbing into a speech his view that
banks should lower credit-card interest rates. The result was
that a Republican lawmaker, Sen. Alfonse D'Amato of New York,
swiftly introduced legislation that caused a furor in
financial markets.
   Shortly before boarding the presidential aircraft in
Mississippi, Mr. Sununu told reporters that he "knew the
rules of the game when he came to town." But his fall
yesterday reflected his ignorance of those rules and his
refusal to abide by them.
   Mr. Sununu, who plans to go into business to improve upon
his government salary, also obliquely noted the reputation
that has dogged his tenure: "I think you know that the
responsibility and authority (contrary to the legends out
there) never meant as much to me as the chance to assist you
to be (and to be recognized) a great President."
   In his reply, Mr. Bush said he accepted Mr. Sununu's
resignation "with reluctance, regret and a sense of personal
loss."
   ---
   John Harwood contributed to this article.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

