
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870325-0008 </DOCNO>
<HL> Hill Democrats Plan Effort to Increase
Minimum Wage Amid Employer Protests
---
By Cathy Trost
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/25/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> LABOR
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   On the day the 25-cent-an-hour minimum wage became the law of the land nearly 50 years ago, a wave of pecan-shelling and tobacco-stemming factories closed throughout the South and industries warned of economic mayhem. 

   Similar alarms are likely to be sounded today when Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.) and Rep. Augustus Hawkins (D., Calif.), who head the Senate and House Labor committees, are expected to introduce legislation to increase the minimum wage from its current rate of $3.35 an hour to about $4.65 hourly over three years, with future automatic annual adjustments. 

   If the wage is boosted, warns Anne Papa, a National Restaurant Association official, "employers will be forced to cut back on their work forces." 

   But pressure is building among Democrats in a Congress they now control to raise the wage, which was last increased six years ago. 
Says Rep. Hawkins: "The cost of living has gone up tremendously since the minimum wage was last raised. 
The value has been eroded." 
Adds Sen. Howard Metzenbaum (D., Ohio): "We haven't adjusted it for inflation for a number of years and the issue needs our attention." 
Prospects for passage look favorable. 
"It is going to happen," predicts a Democratic House strategist. 

   What's less certain is the shape the bill will finally take, and whether a veto is inevitable from a president who once said the minimum wage "has caused more misery and unemployment than anything else since the Great Depression." 
Republicans generally contend that the way to help the low-paid isn't by mandating higher pay and forcing some of them out of jobs but by expanding job training and education. 

   Conceived as part of the New Deal, the minimum wage was heralded at its birth as "one of the most notable advances in our national effort to improve economic conditions in the United States." 

   But inflation has taken a toll in recent years. 
Congress last voted in 1977 to increase the wage; the last of four step-ups occurred in January 1981 when it rose 25 cents to $3.35. 
But while the wage has remained the same, prices have climbed 28%, according to economist Sar Levitan. 
He asserts that the inflation-adjusted value of the minimum wage is now at the lowest level in 33 years. 

   The AFL-CIO calls minimum-wage workers "the have-nots of America." 
The labor federation has made the issue a legislative priority, arguing that an increase is long overdue. 
"The minimum wage simply has not kept up with rising living standards and rising median wages," adds Jeff Faux, president of the Economic Policy Institute, a liberal think tank. 

   Attention to the issue is heightened at a time of national focus on welfare overhaul. 
"If we want to support the work ethic, we have to give people a living wage," says Mr. Levitan, who directs George Washington University's Center for Social Policy Studies. 
He and others concede that increases in the minimum wage do result in some job losses. 
But they contend the extent is overstated, and partly offset by new jobs created by stimulated economic growth. 

   Moreover, an increase will "eliminate a great deal of deprivation in the United States," he says. 
His research shows that income from the minimum wage was enough to raise a family of three out of poverty during most of the 1960s and 1970s. 
But not anymore. 
Now, someone working full-time at the minimum wage earns $6,968 a year, or $1,773 less than the 1986 poverty threshold of $8,741 for a family of three. 
Only a worker living alone can make enough money at the basic wage to lift himself above the poverty line. 

   But many business groups think the consequences of another increase will be dire. 
It would "cost jobs . . . drive up prices and decrease services," asserts Mark de Bernardo, manager of labor law for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 
The chamber claims that 644,000 jobs were lost as a result of the last minimum-wage increase. 

   Employers say they'd have to raise wages for other workers, and costs would inevitably be passed on to the consumer. 
"There were 70,000 small-business failures last year," says Mr. de Bernardo. 
"If we see a minimum-wage increase, that number is going to increase dramatically." 

   Small businesses in the restaurant and retail fields fear the worst damage. 
Jerry Goodwin, president of Reese Coffee Houses in Denver, sees nothing but "harmful effects." 
The last time the minimum was raised, he laid off the graveyard shift at one of his seven coffee shops to cut costs. 
"I let those four people go and those four jobs have been lost forever," he says. 

   Critics argue that ripple effects affect everyone. 
Higher labor costs force employers to cut corners, and service suffers. 
"You go in a parking lot in Denver, there's never an attendant," says Mr. Goodwin. 
"I haven't seen an usher in a theater in 10 years." 

   Counters Rep. Hawkins: "There's something wrong with a small business that needs this substandard wage to survive." 

   About 61 million workers in a national work force of 120 million are covered by the minimum-wage law. 
They are generally those who are engaged in interstate commerce or produce goods for interstate commerce. 
Nearly 3.5 million hourly workers earn the minimum wage, according to the Labor Department, but it's expected that any increase would also benefit the nearly 1.5 million workers who are paid below the minimum and others who earn slightly above the minimum. 

   Who the minimum-wage earners are is a source of dispute. 
Mr. Levitan's research shows that nearly 30% are heads of households and about the same number are teenagers. 
But the Chamber of Commerce claims they are mostly teens entering the work force, students working part time, or adults supplementing primary family incomes. 
Thus the chamber's Mr. de Bernardo says arguments about family poverty are misleading. 
"It is not the head of the household who is earning minimum wage," he says. 

   The historical goal has been a minimum wage equal to half the average wage for non-supervisory private workers, which is currently $8.88 an hour. 
Reaching a consensus among the bill's backers has been difficult as strategists try to balance the concerns of labor and other interests with political expediency. 
Considerations include what, if anything, might be palatable to the White House and what would draw enough support to override a veto. 

   Republicans have warned they may counter the push to expand the minimum wage with a long-sought subminimum wage for teens, but an administration official says no decision has yet been made on its position on an increase. 

   ---
    Rise of the Minimum Wage
    1938        $0.25
    1939         0.30
    1945         0.40
    1950         0.75
    1956         1.00
    1961         1.15
    1963         1.25
    1967         1.40
    1968         1.60
    1974         2.00
    1975         2.10
    1976         2.30
    1978         2.65
    1979         2.90
    1980         3.10
    1981         3.35
    Source: Department of Labor
</TEXT>
</DOC>

