
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ900402-0112
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
900402-0112.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Economics Applies to Child Care Too
   ----
   By Victor R. Fuchs
</HL>
<DATE>
04/02/90
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR
</CO>
<LP>
   With one out of every two new mothers returning to paid
employment before her baby's first birthday, the call for
high quality affordable child care is being heard with
increasing frequency and urgency. Many employed parents
complain that licensed child care is too expensive and that
they have to make do with informal arrangements of uncertain
quality and dependability. Some mothers say that the high
cost of child care discourages them from seeking employment,
while other women remain childless or limit their fertility
for the same reason.
   On Thursday, the House of Representatives voted almost 2
to 1 to expand federal support of day care at an estimated
cost of $27 billion over the next five years. The House bill
is the product of a compromise between those who emphasize
putting more money into the hands of parents, and those who
prefer direct subsidies to daycare providers.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The House vote follows a new -- and not yet
released-report of the National Academy of Sciences that
urges additional government support for child care and
recommends a tightening of the standards regulating the
number of children served by each day-care worker. This
recommendation may be justified, but should be evaluated in
light of the fundamentals of child care economics.
   Discussions of child care need to consider two
contradictory issues: the high cost of child care and the low
pay of childcare workers, whose hourly earnings are the
lowest of any major occupation. They earn 30% to 60% less per
hour than women who serve children as kindergarten or
elementary school teachers. Even more startling, when
child-care workers are compared with other women workers at
the same levels of education, the differential in hourly
earnings is more than 40%.
   Why do child-care workers earn so little? Their wages,
like everyone else's, are determined by the interplay of many
factors which can be analyzed under the familiar categories
of demand and supply. How much are those who buy the services
of child-care workers willing and able to pay? What
considerations lead workers to accept the low wages of child
care rather than seek higher paying jobs?
   The wages that a child-care center can offer its workers
depend entirely on three factors: the gross revenue per
child, the number of children served by each worker and the
overhead expenses. The latter include the costs of
management, rent, equipment and supplies, insurance, payroll
taxes and interest or return on investment. In well run
centers that meet health and safety standards, only about
half of gross revenue is available for the wages of the
child-care workers. For example, if the revenue per child is
$5,000 per year, the child/worker ratio is five and the
overhead is 50%, the annual wage for a full-time, year-round
worker will be $12,500. This is less than half the average
wage of nurses or teachers.
   Who are the child-care workers and why do they accept such
low wages? Current research by Mary Lydon and me throws light
on both these questions. When compared with women workers in
general, or specifically with women who are elementary school
teachers, we find that child-care workers are more likely to
be married, more likely to have children and much more likely
to have three or more children.
   Probably because of their greater family responsibilities,
child-care workers stay close to home. Their average commute
time is much less than that of teachers or other women
workers. They also seem to prefer part-time work. Many of
them do paid work for fewer than 20 hours per week, and most
of the others work less than full time. Generally,
occupations that are located in residential areas and afford
significant part-time opportunities pay lower wages.
   Although their average age is the same as other women
workers, child-care workers are less likely than other women
to have been at work five years previously, which also helps
explain their lower wages. According to the National Academy
report, 40% leave their jobs each year.
   Two other differences between childcare workers and
elementary school teachers (but not other women workers) are
important. First, teachers have on average about four more
years of schooling. But this difference in education explains
only about two-fifths of the wage differential. Second,
teachers -- at least those in the public schools -- are
highly unionized; child-care workers are not. But again, this
is only a partial explanation, as evidenced by the fact that
even non-union teachers in private elementary schools make
20% to 25% more than child-care workers (after controlling
for education, experience and many other variables).
   One striking difference between teachers and child-care
workers is the reward (or lack of reward) for additional
schooling. The wages of teachers rise appreciably with each
additional year of education. By contrast, child-care workers
who are college graduates earn only slightly more than those
whose education ended in high school. The parents who buy
child-care are apparently unwilling or unable to pay more for
workers with additional schooling. Or, from another
perspective, they are unwilling to see the child/worker ratio
rise in exchange for having workers with more education. This
is precisely the trade-off that is made in France. The French
system of care for pre-schoolers is often hailed as a model
for the United States, partly because the child-care workers
are as well educated and as well paid as elementary school
teachers. The child/worker ratio, however, is double that of
American nursery schools and day-care centers.
   Higher wages for child-care workers can be achieved in
only three ways. A reduction in overhead expenses would free
funds for workers' pay, but many of these expenses are
determined by laws and regulations and there is little chance
that this burden will be lifted. A rise in revenue per child
would help, but how high can fees go? An annual charge of
$10,000 per child would probably put child care beyond the
reach of most families. Government subsidies could supplement
private payments, but public aid is most appropriately used
to improve services for poor children, most of whom do not
currently receive even the average standard of care.
   The third possibility, an increase in the child/worker
ratio, offers the most scope for change. Failing such a
change, wages are likely to stay at their extremely low
levels. What is the right way to go? That choice should be
made by parents and child-care experts, not economists. Those
decisions, however, cannot evade or avoid the ABCs of
child-care economics. To want simultaneously to hold down the
cost of care, reduce the child/worker ratio and increase the
pay and qualifications of child-care workers is to wish for a
world that never was and never will be.
   ---
   Mr. Fuchs is a professor of economics at Stanford
University and a research associate with the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

