
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911023-0158
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911023-0158.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Fairness Issue:
   Inequality in Granting
   Child-Care Benefits
   Makes Workers Seethe
   ---
   A New Caste System Evolves
   As Favored Workers Cut
   Deals Unavailable to Peers
   ---
   A Potential Legal Minefield
   ----
   By Janet Guyon
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/23/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR MRK
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
CONSUMER &amp; HOUSEHOLD SERVICES (CSV)
DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<NS>
LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)
MANAGEMENT ISSUES (MNT)
</NS>
<RE>
NEW JERSEY (NJ)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   In the summer of 1990, Jay Fields and his wife were
expecting their second child. Mr. Fields, who worked at First
Boston Corp., asked his boss, a woman, for the same three
months of paid child-care leave that she herself had received
a few months earlier.
   She said no. He appealed to her boss. He said no. Mr.
Fields pointed out that it was probably illegal to deny an
expectant father benefits that expectant mothers got. "They
said there was nothing they could do about it," recalls Mr.
Fields, who later quit for a job elsewhere. "It was an
unwritten rule that leave was at a manager's discretion and
it didn't apply to men."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   As the problem of child care for working parents continues
to fester, employers' selective flexibility is creating a new
caste system. Favored employees are able to cut deals their
colleagues can't, breeding uniquely sharp, and mostly hidden,
resentments. Mr. Fields's experience was typical in that it
began in uncertainty and ended in bitterness; it was unusual
only in that he spoke up about it.
   The covert conflict pits men against women, mothers
against other mothers, professional women against
nonprofessionals and children's needs against those of
employers. "It's a new kind of class structure," says Arlene
Johnson, program director for work-force research at the
Conference Board, a business research group in New York.
"Instead of `What side of the tracks did you grow up on?'
it'll be `Did your family work for a family-supportive
company?'"
   The family-leave bill mandating unpaid leave for most
workers would begin to even things out. But President Bush
has threatened to veto the bill if the House, as expected,
passes it in the next few weeks. Businesses, lobbying heavily
against it, argue that the bill infringes on their
flexibility to plan for their own labor needs.
   But corporate attorneys warn that just as employers often
failed to establish policies protecting themselves against
sexual harassment charges, they now are failing to recognize
the legal pitfalls of giving benefits to the few. "The whole
atmosphere is ripe for claims against companies that have
flexible arrangements" for only some employees, says Joseph
DeGiuseppe Jr., a lawyer at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp;
Flom in New York. "You can't say female employees with
children can work on a flexible arrangement, but if you're
Jewish and want to leave early on Friday you can't do it."
   Last year a federal appeals court in Pittsburgh ruled that
the board of education there illegally discriminated against
a male teacher in 1981 by refusing him a one-year parental
leave offered to women. The Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission cited the case in December when it issued new
policy guidelines stating that employers offering leave to
mothers must offer the same leave to fathers. "This issue is
just coming to the forefront now," says a spokeswoman for the
commission.
   For now, employees who lose out in the corporate
child-care sweepstakes are seething rather than suing. Mr.
Fields, who worked in First Boston's information systems
division, says he considered legal action but decided it
wasn't worth jeopardizing his job. First Boston says it
doesn't have a paternity policy; fathers can ask for an
unpaid personal leave, but that has to be negotiated with the
employee's manager. While not all mothers get paid,
three-month leaves, the firm says, a woman would get such a
leave under the firm's disability policy if a doctor's
opinion required it.
   When Laurel Stemper, a 40-year-old insurance broker in
Atlanta, took a 12-week pregnancy leave from Garlington Group
Inc. in 1989, she assumed her job was secure because another
woman had taken such a leave. Two weeks after her return, her
boss said the company was eliminating her position. Her
responsibilities went to a woman past childbearing age who
had filled in for her.
   She complained to the EEOC, but decided not to file a
claim. "I didn't want to be blackballed in the industry," she
says. "I needed to find another job." Garlington declines to
comment.
   "A lot of females are afraid," says a human-resources vice
president at a regional bank who asks that her name and her
employer's not be given. "They have worked so hard to get to
a point that they don't want to jeopardize it." This woman's
colleague adds, "We have a woman CEO, but she avoids the
issue because she's one of the few women in an all-male
world."
   Some women are so nervous that they try to appear
biologically correct at all times. One analyst at a New York
securities firm says she timed things so she wouldn't appear
pregnant during performance reviews in October and wouldn't
give birth until after bonus time in January. A woman in a
job-sharing program at Steelcase Inc. says she keeps pictures
of her children off her desk.
   Many companies say their case-by-case approach to child
care is the fairest, most efficient way to handle dual-career
parents. Poor performers and easily replaceable employees,
they say, shouldn't get special child-care arrangements.
   "It has to be to the benefit of shareholders, or you
aren't going to do it," says William B. Harrison, 48, a
Chemical Bank vice chairman who has approved innovative
job-sharing arrangements for some high-ranking women
executives. With no formal policy, Chemical approves flexible
work schedules on a case-by-case basis. To the extent that
children of more adept employees benefit, says Royall Victor
III, 52, a managing director, "then I would say those
children are particularly lucky to be the children of
creative, ambitious parents. We don't all come out of a
cookie cutter."
   Winning benefits -- particularly the coveted perk of
flexible hours -- has become a delicate, stealthy art, played
best by working parents in positions of power. Private deals
that don't remain so can easily be blown apart by co-workers
resentful of special treatment.
   When Kim Samara, 36, took maternity leave from
Hewlett-Packard Co. in 1986, she thought she had an agreement
to return, working two days a week in the office and one at
home. When she came back, she was working for a younger woman
new in her job in a group with two other, still-younger
women.
   After six months, her co-workers complained about the
arrangement. Ellen Eisner, 34, one former co-worker, says
that if Ms. Samara was caring for her baby at home, why was
she being paid to work? And if she was working, why wasn't
she in the office? "You're either working eight hours a day
or you're taking care of children," says Ms. Eisner, who is
unmarried. "I would love to work one day at home. It wasn't
an option open to me."
   After months of talks, Ms. Samara was told she had to work
full time. She quit, feeling bitter toward the company and
her colleagues. But she and Ms. Eisner both think much of the
fault rests with Hewlett-Packard; because it didn't have a
standard policy, Ms. Samara says, "you were totally at the
mercy of your manager. If your manager felt secure and would
stick their neck out for you, you were okay."
   Julie Kertzman, Ms. Samara's former supervisor, says she
asked Ms. Samara to come back full time not because of
resentment among other subordinates but because the position,
product management, demanded it. "There are some situations
where {part time} is feasible and some where, based on the
business need, it isn't," she says. "And you have to be
really honest about that."
   Just as top managers get more stock options and nicer
offices, they get better child-care deals than the working
class. One company supplying child care even has a division
-- called ExecuTots -- catering to professionals. "You are
talking about two different worlds," says Claire Lifshitz,
the office manager for a local of the Oil, Chemical &amp; Atomic
Workers International Union. "In factory work, once you punch
your time card, your children don't exist. If you have a sick
child, you don't go in, and you don't get paid for that day.
If that happens too often, you are out of work."
   Merck &amp; Co. provided seed money for a day-care center more
than 10 years ago after a woman scientist threatened to
resign, but tuition at the center, in Rahway, N.J., is about
$680 a month. Professionals can afford that; secretaries
can't. Only now, as Merck plans the construction of two new
child-care centers, is the company considering subsidies for
its lower-paid employees.
   "We do feel we would like to have the centers accessible
to employees at all levels and not really be favoring only
the professionals," says Richard Parker, director of human
resource administrative services at Merck. "We would rather
not say we have one class of employee that is more valuable
to us than another."
   Even companies with formal child-care policies find that
managers aren't always keen on implementing them. NCNB Corp.
says its supervisors fall into three categories: those who
aggressively promote work-family benefits, those who make
deals for a few subordinates, and those who ignore the whole
issue. "There can be resentment when employees hear a
corporate message that's different from the reality," says
Karen Geiger, the bank's career development director.
"Typically, someone will call me anonymously and say, `I am
getting the impression that this isn't okay here.' Then I
will talk to that manager and see if I can work something
out."
   NCNB is unusual in having its human-resources department
act as an ombudsman in such cases. More typically, even
discussing child-care issues at work is freighted with
potential for embarrassment, censure and career-limiting
exposure. A woman who declined to be interviewed for this
article was so nervous about the topic that she later wrote
this cordial note:
   "As you know, upon consideration of your request, I have
decided not to discuss my personal experience or my views on
the subject. Naturally, this also means that I do not want
any reference made to myself or the company for which I work,
including the fact that I have declined to participate in
your research. . . ."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

