
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910905-0001
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910905-0001.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Enterprise:
   Firms Offer Parents Help Caring for Kids
   ----
   By Barbara Marsh
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
CONSUMER &amp; HOUSEHOLD SERVICES, LAWN CARE, TAX PREPARATION (CSV)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)
</IN>
<NS>
LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   The conventional wisdom is that small companies lack the
resources to offer child-care benefits, no matter how much
employees crave them. But a growing number of small
businesses are trying anyway. They're finding that their
small size does create big problems. Yet some are making
child care work.
   Take Stephen Zink, owner of a Louisville, Ky., office
furniture and supply distributor. He personally invested
$50,000, plus $20,000 in company funds, to convert a house
into an on-site day-care center for employees' children.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Then, he faced a problem typical of small employers: With
just 100 employees, he couldn't attract enough children to
fill his center. Consequently, it didn't break even as
expected. Since it opened two years ago, the center has run
up a $30,000 deficit -- financed out of Mr. Zink's pocket and
a loan he guaranteed.
   He's now trying a new approach: He aims to market the
center to nonemployees' kids as well. But he says he's
committed to keeping the center open because it has helped
enhance his company's community image.
   Mr. Zink's center is one of 29 small-company programs
described in a new report by the New York-based Child Care
Action Campaign, a nonprofit child-care advocacy group. The
report tells how companies with fewer than 250 employees have
experimented in recent years, offering day-care centers,
subsidies to employees, referral services, flexible benefit
programs and dependent-care assistance plans.
   The small-company owners offering benefits are often
parents with child-care needs of their own, says Barbara
Reisman, the advocacy group's executive director. Many employ
a high percentage of women, who, she says, still shoulder the
child-care burden in most families. And, she adds, some
started their programs to help resolve their troubles in
recruiting and retaining women employees.
   Many small companies mentioned in the report say their
programs have turned out to be good for business. Employee
morale is up since the programs were started, they say.
Hiring is easier, maternity leaves have shortened, and
turnover is off as much as 50%.
   Pro Tem Professional Temporary Service Inc., a clerical
agency in Portland, Ore., says its program has more than paid
for itself. The company subsidizes its employees' child-care
expenses by paying an extra 50 cents an hour. Last year, it
made a profit -- after expenses, including the subsidy -- of
nearly $50,000 on work done by the 216 parents in the
program.
   Still, such small businesses face a tougher time than big
companies in offering child-care benefits.
   Administrative hassles can sap a small company's tiny
staff. Executives at G.T. Water Products Inc., a maker of
plumbing supplies in Moorpark, Calif., are still haggling
with local officials over zoning and building-code
regulations after opening a school four years ago. Debra
Tash, a vice president, says she spent more than a month
persuading the city council to give the company special
permission to run the school in an industrial zone. She is
still responding to demands by fire-code officials that the
company upgrade the facility. So far, it has spent $5,000 for
new doors, ceiling tiles and dampers.
   "There are times you can pull your hair out and think this
is more trouble than it's worth," she says. But she and her
husband, George Tash, the company's president, have two
children in the school, and they say they're committed to
keeping it open. "There's something cheerier in an
environment when you hear a bunch of kids laughing," Mr. Tash
says.
   Small companies face multiple challenges. They must pay
closer attention than big concerns to the needs of individual
employees. A large employer, for instance, can start a
day-care center by making broad assumptions of needs based on
employee demographics, says Jill Foley, an analyst at the
Employee Benefit Research Institute in Washington, D.C. But a
small company must survey employees. If most of them already
have satisfactory arrangements, she says, it's probably the
wrong time to open a center.
   Small companies with limited resources must take
precautions to limit their liability for the safety of
children in care programs, says Alan Cleveland, a partner at
Sheehan, Phinney, Bass &amp; Green, a Manchester, N.H., law firm
that offers employees a dependent-care assistance plan, which
enables employees to use pretax earnings for some of their
child-care expenses. For on-site day care, where the risk is
great, he advises companies to minimize exposure by avoiding
ownership.
   What's more, limited budgets typically put a crimp in
programs run by small companies. Those operating day-care
centers often skimp on staff, for instance. William Sturgis,
a child-care consultant in Northbrook, Ill., says staffing is
typically so thin that when a day-care teacher gets sick, a
small company must scramble to find somebody to fill in.
   Limited budgets -- and space -- also mean small companies
can't satisfy all their employees' needs. Edgewood Manor
Inc., a nursing home operator in Portsmouth, N.H., offers day
care for children in the nursing home. But employees with
sick children must make other arrangements because the
company didn't allow space for isolating sick kids.
   Edgewoood employees on night shifts miss out on the
program, too, because there aren't enough of them to make it
worthwhile for the company to offer round-the-clock care. One
possible solution: offering spaces to children of night
workers at the local post office.
   Small employers often can't afford consultants to guide
them on the pitfalls of launching new benefits. Watering
Inc., a Bennington, Vt., publisher of a catalog magazine for
antique-car buffs, got gripes from nonparents after it
offered subsidies of up to $3,000 a year for child care. But
Charles Waters, the company's financial vice president, says
the company explained that not everybody takes advantage of
any benefit.
   Some companies have found that employees abuse child-care
benefits. Prime Publishers Inc., in Southbury, Conn., which
publishes a local weekly newspaper, discovered parents were
calling in sick, leaving their children in day care at the
company's expense and going shopping. The company solved the
problem by dropping its subsidy when an employee is ill.
   Not all companies cited in the Child Care Action
Campaign's report are sticking with their programs. Judi
Wineland, owner of Overseas Adventure Travel Inc. in
Cambridge, Mass., started her child-care program five years
ago when she needed care for her growing family. She hired a
care giver to watch her children, plus those of employees and
others, in an apartment in the Victorian house where her
company has its offices.
   But each time a care giver quit, Ms. Wineland and her
husband, who runs an affiliated agency, had to fill in. "It
might last a couple of weeks but it seemed like years," says
Ms. Wineland.
   The latest turnover in care givers so distracted her this
year that she lost business opportunities. As a result, she
has decided to close the program -- a decision that means she
can no longer pause, while working, to hear her two-year-old
laughing in the office's backyard. "That's all gone," she
says sadly. "I hate it."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

