
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911017-0145
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911017-0145.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Management:
   Companies Team Up to Improve Quality
   Of Their Employees' Child-Care Choices
   ----
   By Sue Shellenbarger
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR IBM AXP S EK XRX BOL
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
CONSUMER &amp; HOUSEHOLD SERVICES (CSV)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)
</IN>
<NS>
LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)
MANAGEMENT ISSUES (MNT)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Dismayed by the breadth of the nation's child-care
problems, a growing number of companies are forming joint
ventures to try creative new solutions.
   For years, most big employers have taken band-aid
approaches to their employees' child-care difficulties,
administering federal tax breaks for child-care costs through
their payroll departments or offering referrals to existing
services.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But now, many companies are worried that a shortage of
high-quality child care is hurting productivity. Daunted by
the potential cost of broad efforts to raise the supply and
quality of child care, many of them are joining forces to
stretch their child-care dollars.
   The trend is creating some strange bedfellows.
International Business Machines Corp. is teaming up with
American Express Co. and the Allstate Insurance unit of
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co. on one big project, while Eastman Kodak
Co. has joined forces with Xerox Corp. and Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc.
on another.
   But some creative potential solutions are emerging. Some
partnerships are forcing community child-care standards
higher by subsidizing high-quality facilities that serve the
public. Others are offering new benefits to child-care
workers. Still others are financing efforts by child-care
centers to win accreditation.
   The partnerships "are using a community strategy, and it
goes beyond any individual corporation building its own
child-care center," says Fran Rodgers, president of
Work/Family Directions, a Boston consulting concern that is
organizing and managing many of the new partnerships. "These
companies are building an infrastructure for child care in
this country that doesn't exist."
   The new efforts aren't charity, Ms. Rodgers adds. While
the partnerships draw on the experience of some pioneering
philanthropic ventures, they are financed with corporate
dollars. They also require that their own employees benefit.
   The change in strategy reflects a growing dissatisfaction
with the narrower child-care strategies of the past. Phone
referral services are popular and cheap but do little good in
areas where few openings exist. Many employers, including
American Express, have explored building their own child-care
centers and concluded that the cost and liability are too
great to bear alone. IBM and others worry that corporate
centers shortchange employees who work in branch offices or
prefer other kinds of child care.
   Also, child-care problems in most regions of the country
transcend the efforts of any one company acting alone.
Child-care workers' average pay ranks in the bottom 10% of
all wage-earning categories, well below janitors, and many
receive no health, unemployment or disability benefits.
Morale and education levels among child-care workers are low,
and turnover is more than 40% a year -- more than twice the
national average. The Child Care Action Campaign, an advocacy
group, says the resulting breakdowns in child care cost U.S.
business $3 billion a year.
   To seek new remedies, IBM quietly convened a meeting in
Greenwich, Conn., a few months ago involving 39 of the
nation's largest employers, including Exxon Corp., Amoco Co.,
Tenneco Inc. and Johnson &amp; Johnson. Travelers Corp. and the
Mervyn's and Target units of Dayton Hudson Corp. are also
talking with possible partners. And Allstate is "hotly
pursuing" partnerships in 20 locations and has published a
guidebook to help its regional managers seek out
collaborators.
   In many communities, the corporate dollars are making a
difference. The biggest collaboration so far, a new $2
million, 194-child day-care center in Charlotte, N.C., is
financed by IBM and four partners but is open to the public
as well as sponsors' employees. The center slashes the
teacher-child ratio to half that required by the state of
North Carolina. Employee pay and benefits are above average.
"That drives up costs. But as long as it supports an increase
in the quality of care, we're willing to support it," says
Ted Childs, director of affirmative action and work-force
diversity programs for IBM.
   For Karen Reavis, a senior buyer for IBM in Charlotte, the
funding means her two children, ages 1 1/2 and three, have
better care. At their last center, "I never saw the teachers
interacting with the kids," she says. With two adults in her
older child's class of 24, the children "were just running
around and screaming. There was no sense of order."
   At the new center, a sense of calm prevails. Classes are
half the size. When her son sees his teacher each morning,
"he runs up to her, grabs her and hugs her," Ms. Reavis says.
After just two months, her son already speaks more clearly
and seems more content and less aggressive, she adds. As a
result, "I can concentrate on what I'm doing at work."
   Other programs are creating new slots for children in
family day-care homes -- the small, home-based businesses
that provide a quarter of the paid child care in the U.S. In
the Dallas-Fort Worth area, Child Care Co., with funding from
IBM and Travelers, has recruited 75 new home child-care
providers, each of whom could care for four to six children.
   The program offers incentives to those who complete a
professional training program. "We try to motivate people to
stay with it. We teach that child care is important work. We
offer training in health and safety, and we try to foster a
sense of entrepreneurship," says Roberta Bergman, executive
vice president.
   Such programs have a direct effect on the quality of child
care. Rosemarie Peebles, a Sacramento, Calif., home day-care
provider who completed training financed by the Mervyn's unit
of Dayton Hudson, learned how to take inventory of her toys
and determine what new types she needs to foster broad skills
in the children she cares for. She also learned to keep
computer records on naps, activities and diaper changes, a
practice she says has improved her communication with
parents.
   Other companies have found that even a small increase in
employee benefits can have a big impact on turnover and
credentials among child-care workers. After a corporate task
force including Eastman Kodak, Xerox, Bausch &amp; Lomb and
others helped arrange low-cost group health benefits for
child-care workers in the Rochester, N.Y., area, Karen
Little, the director of the Luv 'n' Care day-care center
there, noticed a difference almost immediately.
   One valued nine-year staffer stopped job-hunting for
better benefits and decided to stay on. Now that Ms. Little
is able to add the word "benefits" to help-wanted
advertising, the pool of applicants has improved, too. "I'm
getting phone calls from professionals, people with good
experience," she says.
   The change has led to a regional improvement in working
conditions, with new child-care centers in the area offering
competitive benefit packages to employees, says Barbara-Ann
Mattle, executive director of the Western New York Child Care
Council, which manages the benefits program.
   Other companies are upgrading existing centers where their
employees have placed their children. IBM and Burroughs
Wellcome Co. are financing efforts by about 20 child-care
centers in the Research Triangle Park, N.C., area to win
accreditation from the National Association for the Education
of Young Children, the largest professional association of
early-childhood educators. That means training staff,
renovating buildings and buying equipment.
   Other partnerships are exploring ways to improve the
supply of emergency child care. Groups of companies and
professional firms in the New York City and Minneapolis areas
have formed networks to provide subsidized care for sick
children and backup care when other arrangements break down.
Two groups in the San Francisco and Long Beach, Calif., areas
are considering similar moves.
   Whatever the outcome, more new child-care partnerships are
likely to be announced in coming months. Given the scope of
the nation's child-care problems and the cost of prospective
solutions, says Barbara Katersky, director of employee
relations for American Express, collaborations "are the only
way corporations are going to be able to afford to go."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

