
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ900706-0092
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
900706-0092.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Parental Concern:
   As Nanny Agencies
   Proliferate, So Do
   Gripes About Service
   ---
   Poor Screening, Fee Disputes,
   Broken Contracts Top
   Clients' List of Complaints
   ---
   The Charges of Child Abuse
   ----
   By Cathy Trost
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/06/90
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR
</CO>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- In searching for someone to care for her
three children, Bonnie Fay of Alexandria, Va., turned to
Mother's Helper Agency, which billed itself in national
advertising as "serving America's most prestigious families."
But the nanny sent by the agency turned out to be something
less than Mary Poppins.
   Ms. Fay says she found marijuana in the room of the woman
she hired three years ago as a live-in nanny. And she fired
the woman after she admitted stealing money from Ms. Fay to
silence a boyfriend who threatened to tell the nanny's
parents about a past abortion. Mother's Helper then demanded
an additional $100 to find a replacement nanny, Ms. Fay says.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The agency says it doesn't know whether Ms. Fay's
allegations are true, and it asked for the extra fee because
the 60-day replacement period was past. Ms. Fay sued the
agency and won a judgment of $1,323 for costs incurred,
including fees paid to the agency. Her advice to other
working parents: consumer beware.
   In a nation of ever more two-paycheck couples, nannies
have become a hot commodity. Agencies have sprung up to
supply them for fees of $400 to $2,500. Many of the agencies
do a conscientious job. But some dissatisfied customers tell
of unchecked references, deficient screening, broken
contracts and unrefunded fees.
   James Rock and Sue Nelson turned to Helping Hands of
Potomac, Md., for a nanny last year, and the one the agency
sent seemed ideal. She had worked for the family of former
Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci, among others. Ms. Nelson
says she and her husband were further impressed when the
agency told them that "friends of the Carluccis wanted to
hire her."
   So the couple hired the nanny for $265 a week, plus health
benefits, her own two-bedroom basement apartment and use of a
car. Mr. Rock, a tax lobbyist, and Ms. Nelson, a staffer on
the Senate Budget Committee, say that about two months later
they were horrified to find purple bruises across their
two-year-old son's buttocks while bathing him one night. At
an emergency room, a physician concluded the boy had "been
hit repeatedly with a long flat stick," recalls Ms. Nelson.
The nanny denied harming the child, but left the next
morning.
   As they later learned, Mr. Carlucci's wife, Marcia, says
Helping Hands never called her about the nanny. Her reference
wouldn't have been glowing. "She was, among other things,
very, very lazy," says Mrs. Carlucci, who also recalls that
the nanny had had two accidents with the family's car.
   Stephanie Hecht, president of Jasah Inc., which does
business as Helping Hands, insists she had checked the
nanny's references. But she says she can't remember whether
she spoke to the Carluccis. Ms. Nelson and Mr. Rock never
accused the nanny of beating the child; the couple said they
had no proof. But they charged the agency with inadequate
screening and demanded a refund.
   When they couldn't get their money back, Ms. Nelson and
Mr. Rock took their dispute to court. They won a default
judgment earlier this year after the agency failed to contest
the claim. They recently got a check for $500 from Helping
Hands.
   Nationally, there are some 500 placement agencies for
nannies. Washington, D.C., home to the highest percentage of
working women among major cities, has a high concentration of
such agencies. Many nannies referred by them are young women
with child-care experience but little formal training,
recruited from towns in the West or Midwest. Weekly salaries
range from about $150 to $450 or more in costly areas such as
New York, plus room and board. Some even get health
insurance, paid vacations and holidays, and the use of a car.
   For a look at the kinds of complaints that can arise,
consider those lodged against Capable Care Agency, which
until last year was called Mother's Helper Agency. Over the
past three years, more than a dozen complaints have been
filed with the Washington Office of Consumer and Regulatory
Affairs, the small-claims branch of the District of Columbia
Superior Court, and the local Better Business Bureau. The
complaints typically involve screening problems or disputes
over refunds or replacements. Most of the complaints have
been resolved.
   Marla Sanders, a co-owner of Capable Care, based in
Washington, with a branch in Philadelphia, says the agency
may appear to have more problems than others because it does
a greater volume of business. (Ms. Sanders also owns a
nanny-placement agency in Beverly Hills, Calif., which
retains the name Mother's Helper.)
   Ms. Sanders calculates that the Washington agency has
placed 2,400 nannies since 1985. "It's a very good agency,"
she says. "I certainly don't invite these things to happen,
and I feel very bad when they happen." Ms. Sanders, a single
mother, says she started the business, which now has nine
full-time employees, after a bad experience with an agency
herself.
   Capable Care bills itself as "nationally known for quality
child care" and entreats parents to "maximize your child's
prime learning years with important help in language and
social development." It's a pitch that attracts many.
   John and Sally Wilhelm chose Capable Care over other
agencies when searching for someone to care for their
two-year-old son last year. From three referrals, the couple
chose a young woman from Utah who noted on her application
that she preferred to work with children aged two and older.
The agency described her as "quiet, calm and well-balanced,"
the Wilhelms say.
   They paid the agency $1,000 in registration and placement
fees, and advanced the woman's $224 air fare. But she seemed
unhappy from the moment she arrived, the Wilhelms say. She
didn't seem comfortable handling a toddler. She would sit
anxiously at the bottom of the stairs, for instance, while
her charge napped in a second-floor bedroom. She suffered a
bout of intense crying several days after arriving and
finally quit, saying she didn't like working with toddlers,
the Wilhelms say.
   Mr. Wilhelm, who is a writer and television producer, says
a Capable Care official later acknowledged that the nanny's
application hadn't been updated for several years. The agency
refunded the couple's fee after several months of complaints.
   Ms. Sanders says that though the application hadn't been
updated as it should have been, the agency checked with the
nanny's most recent employer, whom she had left only three
months earlier. Ms. Sanders says the family gave her a "very
good reference." The nanny "just wasn't comfortable" with the
Wilhelms, Ms. Sanders says. She says the agency refunded the
fee after offering replacements.
   Ms. Sanders and other agency owners say that matching
nannies to families is a delicate process. Sometimes,
personalities just don't mesh. Often, too, nannies who come
from small towns get homesick and have adjustment problems in
big cities.
   Capable Care says it screens carefully. It asks for three
child-care references and one character reference, interviews
the nanny's own family and reviews her work history, says Ms.
Sanders. Criminal and driver's records are checked in the
nanny's state of current residence, though the agency usually
must rely on the nanny herself to supply any criminal
records. The agency also asks applicants to fill out medical
and psychological questionnaires.
   Most applicants are interviewed only by telephone before
being referred to families. If, after 20 days, a nanny
doesn't work out, the agency says it offers to refund half
the referral fee. The agency says it offers to refer names of
a replacement if problems develop in the nanny's first 60
days, or up to six months if the family pays a higher fee.
   Ms. Sanders says her repeat business and customer
referrals speak of customer satisfaction. "They have always
been very cooperative with me," says Christine Mroczek, a
Falls Church, Va., health administrator, who says she
employed three nannies through the agency; she praised both
the agency's screening capabilities and the nannies she
hired. Jeanne Tannebaum, a Washington critical-care nurse,
says the agency honored her replacement guarantee even after
she exceeded the time limits.
   Inadequate screening can have tragic results. The National
Academy of Nannies Inc., a Denver training school, settled
out of court last year a lawsuit involving the referral of a
live-in nanny who gave a prescription anti-depressant drug,
apparently to stop an eight-month-old from crying; the boy
nearly died. After the 1985 incident, Denise Reich, the boy's
mother, learned the nanny had a lengthy medical file
detailing a history of violence, mental disorders and drug
abuse. Mrs. Reich and Terri Eurich, president of the Academy,
won't comment on the case.
   The International Nanny Association, a national advocacy
group for nannies, agencies and child-care educators, is
pushing for national standards and training credentials for
care-givers. At a recent convention the group's board passed
standards that member agencies must meet, including requiring
them to check nannies' references. Nanny training programs
that are members of the group also must meet standards
requiring certain levels of competency from their graduates.
   A good agency undertakes a comprehensive screening program
that goes further than checking references, looking into
criminal and driving records and requiring applicants to
complete a medical history questionnaire, says Bonnie Roeder,
an agency owner who heads the ethics committee for the nanny
association.
   In their defense, agencies say families themselves
sometimes mistreat nannies. They point to cases where parents
try to slip out of contracts, don't bother checking
references on their own, or overload nannies with work. But
Ms. Roeder also concedes that "there are some real pockets in
this industry that I would like to see we get rid of because
it affects the rest of us who are trying to do a good job."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

