
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910213-0136
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910213-0136.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   He Doesn't Drink or Chase Women, He Says
   ----
   By William Murchison
</HL>
<DATE>
02/13/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   John G. Tower, conservative Republican senator from Texas,
son of a respected Methodist preacher, boozed it up and
fooled around. His first marriage fell apart; his second made
him miserable. All the while, he preened himself as the first
statewide Republican officeholder since Reconstruction.
   John G. Tower wasn't -- isn't -- St. John the Divine, as
he himself acknowledges with semi-charming candor in
"Consequences: A Personal and Political Memoir (Little,
Brown, 388 pages, $22.95). Did he deserve, even so, public
flagellation as George Bush's defense-secretary nominee?
</LP>
<TEXT>
   You would obviously expect Mr. Tower to say no, and he
obliges: volubly and passionately. If that was all there was
to "Consequences," we could scan the dust jacket and invest
our savings in local real estate.
   "Consequences" reads a bit like a political Stephen King
story as the small senator swelled into a Beltway monster.
Politics never has been for the squeamish, but the Tower
controversy leaves a much more disagreeable taste than did
the senator's caperings (which mostly took place in the '70s
anyway). Were the writing less stiff and the narrative
technique less choppy, "Consequences" might have been a
classic case study of late 20th-century politics out of
control.
   Given Mr. Tower's qualifications for the job --
intelligence, patriotism and past chairmanship of the Armed
Services Committee -- the nomination should have sailed
through with flying colors. Instead it sank like the
Bismarck.
   Clearly and apparently to his surprise, Mr. Tower had made
many enemies since his arrival in Washington in 1961, often
rubbing even supporters the wrong way. The senator from the
Lone Star State could be lordly, in his English-cut suits.
Once, meeting with the editors of my newspaper which had
backed him strongly, he thought nothing of tilting back in
his chair, crossing his tiny, well-shod feet atop the
conference table.
   When the Tower hearings opened, all manner of accusations
came to public notice. The New Right activist Paul Weyrich
claimed to have seen the senator consorting with A Lady Not
His Wife. It was reported that Mr. Tower had chased a
secretary around his desk and had fondled women at Bergstrom
Air Force Base. The second wife, whom the senator had
recently divorced, possessed a repertory of tales she
cheerfully volunteered. At his hotel, Mr. Tower was accorded
that doubtful tribute to instant-celebrity status, the media
stakeout. The nominee issued fervent denials: He drank only
wine, having long since sworn off scotch; he'd never chased
secretaries; his services for defense-industry clients had
been proper and modest. None of the charges, at least on Mr.
Tower's showing, proved to have the least substance. No use.
Dirt is dirtier than purity is pure, as one of John O'Hara's
characters observes.
   Sen. Sam Nunn, Mr. Tower's successor as Armed Services
Committee chairman, seemed initially to smile on the
nomination; then the rumor mill started churning and he
changed fronts. While endeavoring to look statesmanlike, Sen.
Nunn leaned on moderate Democrats who would otherwise have
supported Tower. Sen. Nunn made the campaign personal, says
Mr. Tower -- vote for me or vote for him. Most Democrats, in
the end, went with Sen. Nunn.
   What was all this about? Morality? Mr. Tower suggests
instead that Sen. Nunn, a presidential hopeful, discovered
and seized an opportunity to show who was really No. 1 on
national defense.
   Sen. Nunn had every reason to know that the moral and
ethical charges leveled at Mr. Tower, and investigated
exhaustively by the FBI, were flimsy. Yet he waved them about
anyway. When the media retailed lurid and unsubstantiated
stories, Sen. Nunn pursed his lips like a Georgia
Sunday-school superintendent and suggested that a drunken Mr.
Tower might accidentally press the nuclear button.
   "Sam Nunn," Mr. Tower insists, "used the FBI inquiries to
discredit me and to strike at the president of the United
States. The essential chain of good judgment and goodwill
broke down during my confirmation process."
   Sen. Nunn has company on Mr. Tower's dishonor roll. There
is Sen. Ernest Hollings ("a study in arrogance and
pomposity"), Sen. James Exon ("one of the most excessive
regular boozers in the Senate") and NBC's Andrea Mitchell
("the most viciously partisan reporter I've ever seen"),
along with the Washington press corps. Sen. John Warner, a
Republican, is depicted as falling all over himself to stay
in good with Sen. Nunn.
   Mr. Tower feels, not without reason, that he was arraigned
on morals charges by cynical colleagues and media personages
whom no one ever mistook for Southern Baptist deacons. "I
don't so much resent my rejection by the Senate," Mr. Tower
insists, "as the way it was done."
   "Tower, you were lynched," Mike Wallace, the CBS
correspondent, told him. Worse yet, the lynch mob remains at
large.
   ---
   Mr. Murchison is a senior columnist for the Dallas Morning
News.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
