<SUM
TYPE="MULTI"
SIZE="400"
DOCREF="FBIS3-59402 FBIS3-2898 FBIS4-49756 FBIS3-46297
FBIS3-1669 FT944-5494 FT931-2934 FT922-10026
FT924-11508 FT924-4821 FT924-12193"
SELECTOR="F"
SUMMARIZER="F">

Hong Kong's new governor, Chris Patten, finds the colony thriving upon
his arrival.  Hong Kong is important to China in the areas of foreign
exchange and investment.  Patten has pressed China to accept his
proposals for political development or make alternatives.  Lu Ping,
director of China's office of Hong Kong and Macau affairs and Patten
are at an impasse on financing of a new airport project.
Deteriorating relations between the two have affected the colony's
financial markets.  China says it will repudiate commercial agreements
of the colony if not first agreed to by Beijing and threatens to
ignore the results of democratic elections proposed by Patten.  Patten
has modified some of his positions, replacing functional groups with
statutory bodies and scaling back his electorate demands.  Patten said
when Hong Kong made decisions things went well, but if Chinese
consultation was necessary, nothing worked.

Chinese writers believe that Patten is against China and rebuke him
for referring to Hong Kong as an international asset, thereby denying
China's sovereignty.  They also believe that Britain is unwilling to
return Hong Kong to China.  They say that Patten has acted without
regard for China and that the British side is "double-faced" in
negotiations.  China's understanding of Hong Kong made it possible for
it to advance the policy of "one country, two systems".

The basic law had stipulated that the socialist system would not be
practiced and that the previous capitalist system would remain
unchanged for 50 years.  Hong Kong's passage from British Colony to a
"special administrative region" of China will be controversial.  The
two countries have agreed on the funding of the airport project and
the Chinese realize they need British cooperation.  The biggest
problem remaining is continuity of the civil service since the people
are still fearful of the Communist Party.  Beijing has said that it
will dismiss the Legislative Council and replace it with a provisional
legislature when it assumes sovereignty.  China's supporters say that
Patten's repeal of some of the Colony's more repressive laws will make
it harder to govern.

Lu Ping and Patten fault each other for lack of cooperation.  Lu Ping
promotes the Preliminary Working Group as the best venue for
discussions and says that Patten has closed the door to Hong Kong's
civil servants meeting with it.  Patten dismisses the PWG as China's
creation and pushes for the Joint Liaison Group since it is treaty
established.  </SUM>
