
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870428-0106 </DOCNO>
<HL> Arkansas Gov. Clinton's Hard-Won State Reforms
Could Be at Stake if He Seeks the Presidency in '88
---
By Dennis Farney
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/28/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> LITTLE ROCK, Ark.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Ambition is a little engine that gives Gov. Bill Clinton no rest. 

   Ambition has propelled this bright, engaging Rhodes Scholar into the dogfights of 15 primary and general-election campaigns (successful and not) in only 12 years. 
Ambition and its consequences, 6 1/2 turbulent years as governor, have made him "the oldest 40-year-old man in America," he says. 
He jokes that Arkansans have treated him the way an Ozarks mountaineer treated a three-legged hog -- a hog too good, the mountaineer explained, "to eat him all at once." 

   Now ambition has goaded this Democrat to the brink of a presidential bid, and a fundamental choice. 
Does he want to protect his legacy as governor, including sweeping education reform, or go for national glory? 
Under the creaky Arkansas constitution of 1874, it will be very hard to do both. 

   That constitution transforms an Arkansas governor into a pumpkin the instant he crosses the state line. 
His power passes to the lieutenant governor or, in his absence, the Senate president pro tem. 
The consequences can be startling. 

   A few weeks ago Gov. Clinton took a trip to Washington. 
By the time he got back, Senate President Pro Tem Nick Wilson, a Democratic adversary with scores to settle, had made 20 appointments to state boards and, for good measure, demoted Mr. Clinton's chief of staff, Betsy Wright. 
Mr. Clinton rescued Ms. Wright, but most other Wilson decisions will stick. 

   Sen. Wilson says the governor can easily avoid future embarrassments. 
Just stay home. 

   Gov. Clinton grouses that the senator behaved like his seven-year-old daughter, Chelsea Clinton, on a bad day. 
But the incident vividly illustrated the risks here at home of a presidential campaign. 

   "It's very hard for a governor to run for president," he says. 
"Carter and Reagan did it, but they weren't sitting governors any more." 

   That reality could yet dissuade Mr. Clinton from running. 
But sitting in his sun-washed office -- an Arkansas-made fiddle on the mantlepiece, portraits of Lincoln and Churchill looking down upon his desk -- he leaves little doubt that his heart is already on the campaign trail. 

   Such a race would be a long shot at best. 
But there's a potential opening for a progressive southerner in the long nomination contest. 
And with better-known Southern Democrats like Arkansas Sen. Dale Bumpers and Georgia Sen. Sam Nunn apparently uninterested in running, men like Gov. Clinton and Tennessee Sen. Albert Gore Jr. are moving to the forefront. 

   Mr. Clinton undoubtedly would run as a pragmatist who made government work, a man who prepared citizens for today's era of international competition by investing heavily in education. 
Arkansas now is among the nation's top 10 states in the ratio of computers to students. 
Three-fourths of its high school students now graduate, the best ratio in the South and better than the national average of 71%. 

   A mature politician, Mr. Clinton says, is one who can "harness ambition" and learn from his mistakes. 
And has he succeeded? 

   "I hope so," he replies after a pause. 
"I've certainly tried." 
Arkansas voters have seen to that, tempering and ultimately humbling the brash young man they elevated to governor from attorney general in 1978. 

   Bill Clinton was riding high, at age 32 the nation's youngest governor, his unsuccessful congressional bid of 1974 only a memory. 
But in 1980 Arkansans bounced him out of office. 
Jimmy Carter helped drag him down, first dumping hordes of Cuban refugees on Fort Chaffee, then precipitating the Republican landslide of 1980. 
But the ultimate factor was Mr. Clinton himself. 

   "People got the impression he was a hot shot," says Archie Schaffer, a former administrative assistant to Sen. Bumpers. 
Arkansans have always had "a parenting attitude" toward their precocious governor, ventures chief of staff Betsy Wright; in 1980 they took him to the woodshed. 

   The defeat, accepted by a tearful Mr. Clinton, taught him something. 
Having sailed into office chockablock with ideas gathered at Georgetown, Yale and Oxford, "he thought he had listened enough," recalls his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton. 
"He learned that the listening process never ends." (An attorney and power in her own right, Mrs. Clinton was named by her husband in 1983 to head the Arkansas Education Standards Committee, which oversaw the state reform effort.) 

   Voters forgave him in 1982. 
Bill Clinton regained the governorship after shortening his hair and promising not to "lead without listening." (His wife did her part by campaigning as Hillary Clinton instead of Hillary Rodham.) 
He won smashing reelection victories in 1984 and 1986, when the state went to a four-year term. 
Now he heads the National Governors' Association. 

   Some veteran lawmakers here say the 1980 thrashing left Mr. Clinton a different, more cautious man. 
One is state Sen. Wilson, the man who upset the apple cart as acting governor recently. 
Sen. Wilson, a progressive, says his feud with Gov. Clinton stems from a broken commitment, not philosophical differences. 
But he does see a gap between the governor's rhetoric and his actions. 

   "When you hear him speak out of state, you just want to stand up and cheer," says the senator. 
"You think he's ready to charge hell with a bucket of water. 
Then he gets back home and that woman (chief of staff Wright) gets out her polls, and he's a different person." 

   Still, the Clinton record does contain both risk-taking and solid accomplishment. 
Ms. Wright, who directed the 1986 Clinton campaign, argues that the governor's popularity with Arkansans would be "the least of his gambles" if he runs for the White House. 
"How to protect his programs -- that's what he's wrestling with." 

   The heart of that record is education reform. 
Mr. Clinton is probably best known as the first governor to force teachers to take competency tests, which embittered the National Education Association. 
But he also pushed a grass-roots campaign that persuaded the Legislature to raise the sales tax for the first time in two decades, channeling all proceeds into education; helped raise standards for school districts and pushed for special programs for gifted pupils. 

   The governor also champions welfare revision. 
Arkansas now requires recipients to sign a "contract" committing them to upgrade their job skills. 
At the same time, the state has increased its budget for job training. 

   But Clinton-era programs could be stunted without further tax increases -- hard to get in a state that ranks 47th in per-capita income. 
Gov. Clinton asked the just-completed legislative session for $163 million in new revenue; it gave him only $66 million. 
Some say a preoccupation with presidential politics contributed to the setback. 
"He really never got deeply involved until the last weeks," says House Speaker Ernest Cunningham, a frequent Clinton ally. 

   A special session seems likely. 
But handling it, a delicate business at best, would be even touchier if the governor continues to eye the White House. 
The "hot shot" image of 1980 hasn't disappeared. 
It's just latent, and periodically Mr. Clinton comes close to reactivating it. 

   Mr. Clinton knows he's walking a tightrope between national and state constituencies. 
The day after his 1986 election, he gave a televised interview to NBC's nationally distributed "Today" show -- then tried to limit the Arkansas press to a wordless "photo opportunity." 
Amid cries of outrage, one Arkansas newspaper editorialized that the "real" Bill Clinton had resurfaced with "the same old egotism and arrogance." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>

