
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920206-0058
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920206-0058.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy --  Campaign '92:
   Clinton Received a Vietnam Draft Deferment
   For an ROTC Program That He Never Joined
   ----
   By Jeffrey H. Birnbaum
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/06/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<RE>
ARKANSAS (AR)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   HOT SPRINGS, Ark. -- It was the summer of 1969. The
Vietnam War was raging. And young Bill Clinton didn't want to
be drafted.
   Mr. Clinton was in a bind because although he was studying
as a Rhodes scholar at England's Oxford University,
graduate-school deferments had been ended in 1967. But he
found an out: He said he would join a reserve-officers
training program at the University of Arkansas while he
attended law school there.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In fact, he never joined the program, or even attended the
law school. But it exempted him from the draft during
September and October of 1969, the critical two months when
he expected to be called into service.
   By October, he had a change of heart and subjected himself
to possible induction. But by then the draft lottery was
about to take effect and he drew a lottery number high enough
that he never was called.
   Many young men with Mr. Clinton's educational background
found ways to avoid military service during the Vietnam War.
But the issues raised by his conduct remain relevant for
several reasons. The question of whether Vice President Dan
Quayle used influence to get into the Indiana National Guard
in 1969 -- and thus avoid Vietnam -- stirred a debate in the
last campaign, and Republicans no doubt will demand that Mr.
Clinton's record receive equal scrutiny. Moreover, people
directly involved with Mr. Clinton's draft status contradict
his version of what happened.
   Even back in 1969, Bill Clinton wasn't just any young man.
Though he had been classified 1-A -- available for military
service -- when he graduated from Georgetown University in
the spring of 1968, as a Rhodes scholar he was the pride of
his community. So instead of calling him right away, the
local draft board gave him a reprieve to allow him to
continue his studies at Oxford.
   "As old as he was, he would have been at the top of the
list" to be drafted, says 84-year-old Opal Ellis, the draft
board's executive secretary. But, she explains, "we were
proud to have a Hot Springs boy with a Rhodes scholarship,"
and so "the board was very lenient with him. . . . We gave
him more than he was entitled to."
   Mr. Clinton's own memory is even more precise. He says the
board told him that he wouldn't be drafted until the fall of
1969, a year and a half after being designated 1-A. "The
board said, `You'll probably be called in the fall, September
or October {of 1969},'" he says in an interview.
   So when Mr. Clinton returned home after his first year at
Oxford, he knew the draft was imminent. Mrs. Ellis, a
Republican who held her civil-service position for 20 years,
alleges that he "went in and told me he was too well educated
to go." She says he told her that "he was going to fix my
wagon {and} pull every string he could think of." But Mr.
Clinton says he doesn't recall having any confrontation with
Mrs. Ellis, and he strongly denies using strongarm tactics to
avoid the draft; anyone who says he did, he says, "has, at
best, a faulty memory." In any case, Mr. Clinton says he
decided to, in his words, "look around" for another option.
He opposed the war, but if he had to serve he preferred to be
an officer rather than a draftee, so he sought an officer's
training program to join. He took the Air Force officer's
exam, he says, but failed because of a vision defect. He also
took the naval officer's test, but failed because of a
hearing problem. (He had already taken his draft physical,
and neither problem prevented him from passing.)
   Then, as his expected draft deadline loomed, Mr. Clinton
met Col. Eugene Holmes, an Army ROTC recruiter at the
University of Arkansas at Fayetteville. Both men say Mr.
Clinton agreed orally to join the Army officer's program at
the law school there.
   And based on that consent, the Hot Springs draft board, on
Aug. 7, 1969, reclassified Mr. Clinton from 1-A to 1-D -- a
draft deferment that a spokesman for the Selective Service
System says was only for people who had joined a reserve
unit, or who were students taking military training, such as
the ROTC.
   But Mr. Clinton never joined the training program -- and
for that matter, never even enrolled at the university. He
had one more year to go at Oxford, and intended to complete
that work. And when he finally returned to the U.S. in 1970,
he enrolled not at Arkansas, but at Yale Law School.
   Mr. Clinton says he indeed planned to attend Arkansas,
after he completed his studies in England. He says the
university informally accepted him based on his academic
record, though he never formally applied there. A Clinton
aide says the governor believes that he applied to Yale
during his second year at Oxford.
   But even Virginia Kelley, Mr. Clinton's mother, says she
doesn't remember him planning to attend Arkansas. "That's
very strange," she says. "I was under the impression when he
came home from Oxford that he was going to go to Yale."
   Mr. Holmes, who counts himself as a political independent,
says Mr. Clinton's true plans weren't ever made plain to him;
he thought Mr. Clinton's arrival was imminent. "I thought he
was going to finish a month or two in England and then come
back to the University of Arkansas," he says, adding of the
1-D deferment: "I couldn't have done it for a year. That
wouldn't have been ethical." He charges that "Bill Clinton
was able to manipulate things so that he didn't have to go
in."
   Mr. Clinton disputes Mr. Holmes's version of what
happened. He says Mr. Holmes offered him the ROTC deferment
immediately and also encouraged him to return for his final
year at Oxford. "I remember talking to Holmes one day, and he
said: `You know, you can't go to summer camp until next
summer anyway. Why don't you just go back and do your second
year in England?'" Mr. Clinton recalls.
   In any event, Mr. Clinton had his deferment in time to
cover the very period -- September and October of 1969 --
that the draft board had earlier told him was when he would
probably be conscripted.
   Asked whether the deferment was proper, Mr. Clinton says:
"I didn't know what the rules were. All I can tell you is
what they told me." But he says he soon had doubts about the
morality of it. "I had already had one year, I had high
school classmates who were already dead," he says. "I decided
it was an inappropriate thing to do."
   So Mr. Clinton informed Col. Holmes that he wouldn't be
joining the ROTC after all. Mr. Clinton recalls that he
notified Col. Holmes that he wouldn't participate in ROTC in
"September or early October." Col. Holmes has trouble
remembering, though he thinks it might have been "a month or
two months" from the time of their August conversation.
   But Mr. Holmes says he was angered to learn of the change
of plans, and moved to revoke Mr. Clinton's draft deferment.
On Oct. 30, 1969, Mr. Clinton was reclassified 1-A.
"Ethically I think he should have stayed in ROTC," Mr. Holmes
says. "He'd given his word and was backing out."
   Having averted the fall draft, Mr. Clinton says he was
fully prepared to be conscripted. But he was never called. A
new draft lottery system, based on dates of birth, was
enacted into law on Nov. 26. And on Dec. 1, 1969, Mr. Clinton
got number 311. No one with a number higher than 195 was
called, according to the Selective Service System.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

