
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920312-0114
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920312-0114.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Campaign '92 -- The FOBs:
   How `Outsider' Clinton
   Built a Potent Network
   Of Insider Contacts
   ---
   Carefully Cultivated Friends,
   Many From College Days,
   Rush to His Aid in Crises
   ---
   The Kindergarten Connection
   ----
   By Jill Abramson
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/12/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   When allegations of draft dodging threatened to blow up
Bill Clinton's campaign, a crew of former Rhodes scholars
became his Patriot missile.
   The group included Harvard economist Robert Reich, Time
magazine editor at large Strobe Talbott and Richard Stearns,
a Massachusetts state judge -- all friends of Mr. Clinton
since their days together at Oxford University. Each talked
to reporters about Mr. Clinton's passionate opposition to the
Vietnam War and his anguish over his draft status. Another
friend from his Oxford days, Michael Mandelbaum, a national
security expert from Johns Hopkins University, wrote a New
York Times opinion piece staunchly defending Mr. Clinton's
actions.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In Georgia, where the draft issue and allegations of
womanizing threatened to derail the candidacy, it was Gov.
Zell Miller and Sen. Sam Nunn, two friends of Mr. Clinton
from the centrist Democratic Leadership Council, who came to
the rescue. Sen. Nunn, the chairman of the Armed Services
Committee, lent his credibility on defense matters, while Mr.
Miller launched stinging rhetorical attacks on Mr. Clinton's
rivals for the nomination.
   Nobody collects friends like Bill Clinton -- and nobody
puts them to better use. Inside the Clinton campaign, they
are known as the FOBs -- Friends of Bill's -- and they make
up a remarkable network. Its members include a virtual who's
who of the 40-something Democratic establishment, with large
contingents from Georgetown and Oxford universities, Yale Law
School, the 1972 McGovern campaign, the Democratic Leadership
Council and an elite policy organization known as the
Renaissance Group.
   His extraordinary network of loyalists left Mr. Clinton in
position to mount his sweeping victory in this week's Super
Tuesday primaries. Now, the FOBs are focusing on next week's
critical tests in Illinois, where Mr. Clinton's law school
moot court opponent is helping organize the state, and
Michigan, where a former roommate is doing likewise.
   Mr. Clinton portrays himself as a Washington outsider. "I
am not the favorite candidate of the Beltway," he said after
his loss in this month's Maryland primary to Paul Tsongas,
whom he criticizes for his work as a Washington lobbyist. Yet
a host of Washington lobbyists have been Mr. Clinton's
"benefactors" -- individuals committed to raising at least
$10,000 for the campaign.
   "The notion that he'll be an outsider unschooled in the
ways of Washington is really a misperception," says Stuart
Eizenstat, a Washington lawyer, former Carter administration
official and friend and adviser to Mr. Clinton. "This is a
guy who is very much plugged in."
   Unlike Mr. Eizenstat's former boss, Jimmy Carter, Mr.
Clinton would arrive in the White House with longstanding
ties to official Washington and with an array of friends from
the Democratic Party's policy elite, the business world and
the legal community. He would be the most
Establishment-rooted Democratic president since John F.
Kennedy, a surprising feat for the governor of a small,
relatively poor state.
   Mr. Clinton's friends say they are drawn to him by his
intelligence and charm. In addition, after more than a decade
of graying GOP leadership, many evidently are lusting for a
return to power, and see him as their best hope.
   But another reason Mr. Clinton has been able to attract
and keep so many friends is simply that he works at it. Mr.
Clinton is calculating and ambitious, having set his sights
on the presidency during his teen-age years. Throughout his
life, he has stayed in touch with people through letters and
notes. He has also sought to involve his friends at decisive
moments in his career. In 1987, for instance, he summoned a
number of them from his Oxford and McGovern days (he ran the
1972 nominee's Texas campaign) to help him decide whether to
mount a presidential campaign in 1988.
   "The idea that he would one day be running for president
occurred to all of us," says William Coleman III, a Detroit
lawyer who was Mr. Clinton's roommate at Yale Law School. Mr.
Coleman, son of former Transportation Secretary William
Coleman, is helping organize blacks for Mr. Clinton in next
week's Michigan primary.
   Because he had cultivated so many friends who went on to
high places, Mr. Clinton began his presidential effort with a
built-in issues-and-money machine. Friends inside Arkansas,
such as Thomas (Mack) McLarty, chairman of Arkla Inc., the
gas utility, raised millions early in the campaign season.
Mr. McLarty attended Miss Mary's kindergarten with Mr.
Clinton in Hope, Ark.
   After a supermarket tabloid reported allegations that Mr.
Clinton had a long extramarital affair, Harry Thomason,
another Arkansas native who now lives in Hollywood and
produces the hit CBS television program "Designing Women,"
flew to his old friend's side in New Hampshire. Mr. Thomason
helped Mr. Clinton's media advisers put together two live TV
programs to answer the charges.
   In Baton Rouge, attorney Alston Johnson has been shaking
the money trees in Louisiana for his old friend. He
nostalgically recalls the summer of 1963, when he and Mr.
Clinton met at an American Legion Boys Nation conference in
Washington and got to shake President Kennedy's hand. Mr.
Clinton uses a photograph of that occasion in his campaigns.
   All four of Mr. Clinton's roommates from Georgetown
campaigned for him in New Hampshire. On Wall Street, another
friend from Georgetown days, Roger Altman, an investment
banker with the Blackstone Group, has personally raised
$75,000 for the candidate. Mr. Altman says Mr. Clinton's
political skills were already so well honed at Georgetown
that his successful campaign to become leader of the student
government "was like watching a hot knife go through butter."
   At Oxford, other future contacts were cemented. Besides
fielding draft queries for his friend, Mr. Reich is at the
center of the Clinton campaign brain-trust, pumping out
issues papers and speeches from his office at Harvard
University's Kennedy School of Government. "Bill and I have
been talking about these issues for 25 years," Mr. Reich
says. "The poor man has been encumbered with all my books and
articles, and there is even evidence that he has read them."
   Mr. Talbott of Time magazine says it "required some
reflection" before he spoke out in the press about how many
Rhodes scholars, including Mr. Clinton, felt about the war in
Vietnam. "In general, people in our line of work don't become
part of the story," he says. But he says he felt compelled to
step forward when he saw his friend being attacked as a
draft-dodger. "I saw that as an inaccuracy," he says. "Since
I was part of that cohort and knew the frame of mind, I felt
that I should speak out." Mr. Talbott, who appears regularly
on the public-affairs television program "Inside Washington,"
discloses his friendship with Mr. Clinton when he discusses
politics.
   Douglas Eakeley, another former Rhodes scholar and friend
from Oxford days, says he put together a successful
fund-raiser for the campaign in New Jersey last December
simply by calling on a list of Mr. Clinton's old pals from
Georgetown, Yale Law and Oxford. "To have someone from
Arkansas running for president and trying to raise money in
New Jersey should have been unheard of," Mr. Eakeley says.
"But we raised $100,000 largely because of this extraordinary
network."
   At Yale Law School, Mr. Clinton met his wife, Hillary, who
has her own formidable network of friends. Mrs. Clinton has
brought an array of high-powered attorneys into the campaign.
They include New York lawyer Susan Thomases, a politically
adept former aide to New Jersey Sen. Bill Bradley, who has
traveled with Mrs. Clinton and helped deflect questions
raised about the couple's investments with a former
savings-and-loan operator.
   It was also Mrs. Clinton who brought Los Angeles lawyer
Mickey Kantor into her husband's inner circle of advisers;
Mr. Kantor had served with her on the board of the Legal
Services Corp.
   From their days organizing Texas for the McGovern
campaign, Bill and Hillary Clinton have a small army of
followers. Mr. Clinton won Texas so decisively partly because
Garry Mauro, the popular state land commissioner, had spent
months organizing the state. Mr. Mauro met the Clintons in
the McGovern campaign, as did Carl Wagner, a prominent
Democratic Party operative whose political counsel Mr.
Clinton has sought over the years. Harold Ickes, the New York
lawyer who helped manage Jesse Jackson's 1988 campaign and is
working the state for Mr. Clinton this year, met him in
Project Pursestrings, an anti-Vietnam War effort launched
after the 1972 election.
   In 1978, when Mr. Clinton became his state's youngest
governor at the age of 32, he invited many of his old friends
to his inauguration and even appointed some of them to state
jobs. During the Carter administration, Mr. Clinton made sure
he was known inside the White House, dropping in on Mr.
Eizenstat and others. Later, during the Reagan years, he used
the National Governors Association as a vehicle to forge
alliances with other elected Democrats. An array of former
governors, including James Blanchard of Michigan and Richard
Riley of South Carolina, have put their old organizations to
work for Mr. Clinton.
   Mr. Clinton's chairmanship of the Democratic Leadership
Council gave him access to a host of conservative and
moderate Democratic bigwigs, from Sen. Nunn, whose early
endorsement helped give his candidacy credibility, to Buddy
MacKay, who is now Florida's lieutenant governor. The DLC
connection also gave Mr. Clinton an issues factory: Its
affiliated think-tank, the Progressive Policy Institute,
helped churn out most of the candidate's major speeches last
fall.
   The least-known of the Clintons' networks may be the one
that runs through the Renaissance Group. Founded by a South
Carolina businessman and unsuccessful gubernatorial candidate
in the early 1980s, it is a nonpartisan, policy-oriented
group that spends New Year's Eve weekend attending issues
seminars and playing golf in Hilton Head, S.C.
   Originally, it included mostly Sunbelt politicians who
shared an aversion to going out on New Year's Eve. "The
original idea was to spend the time to think about the year
just passed and the year ahead," says David Ifshin, a
well-known pro-Israel Democrat who serves as Mr. Clinton's
general counsel.
   The group grew rapidly and includes such disparate members
as Supreme Court Justice Harry Blackmun, liberal New York
attorney and Kennedy insider Theodore Sorensen and David
Gergen, another journalist with whom Mr. Clinton is on
friendly terms. At least a half-dozen high-powered lawyers
working for Mr. Clinton in Washington, D.C., including Mr.
Ifshin, met him through Renaissance. "Bill and Hillary have
been at the center of it," says Mr. Ifshin.
   Mr. Sorensen draws parallels between President Kennedy and
Mr. Clinton. "Kennedy blazed the trail for Clinton," he says.
"They both used their youth to fit in with a message of
change. They both included a diversified group of friends in
their campaigns." The Kennedy campaign included Choate School
roommates, old Navy buddies and Harvard brain-trusters. But
Mr. Kennedy was born into privilege, while Mr. Clinton, born
of modest means, has built his network from scratch.
   Lately, there has been some tension between the various
concentric circles of FOBs. Some of Mr. Clinton's advisers
from the McGovern and early days have tried to push the
campaign in a more traditionally progressive direction, while
his advisers within the Democratic Leadership Council would
like him to sharpen his attack on liberal orthodoxy. Will
Marshall, president of the DLC-affiliated Progressive Policy
Institute, worries that with so many campaign cooks and so
many competing agendas, Mr. Clinton's message has lost some
of its "resolution" of late. But if anyone can keep the
disparate network together, he says, it is the man at the
center of it.
   "Clinton is good at getting the best from a wide spectrum
of people," Mr. Marshall says.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

