
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911008-0132
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911008-0132.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Clinton, Arkansas's Best-Known Overachiever,
   Widens His Horizons to Include the White House
   ----
   By David Shribman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A24
</SO>
<IN>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
</IN>
<NS>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<RE>
ARKANSAS (AR)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>

candidates}
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   HOT SPRINGS, Ark. -- He moved into the governor's mansion
at 32, heir to a tradition of progressive Southern governors
and ready to light up Arkansas. It was January 1979 and there
was so much to do: Education needed to be overhauled, the
business climate needed to be improved, the state needed to
be dragged out of its slumberous, defeatist past. Bill
Clinton, the youngest governor in the nation since Harold
Stassen, had such big plans.
   But two years later Mr. Clinton -- educated at Georgetown,
Oxford and Yale, stylish, glib -- was out of office.
Arkansans chafed at his arrogance. They recoiled at his grand
bargain, a small rise in automobile license plate fees in
exchange for road improvements. They didn't like the idea
that his wife, a lawyer, hadn't taken his name. They flinched
at being regarded as a backwater reclamation project.
   The morning after the 1980 election his wife calmly sat in
the governor's mansion and called a real-estate agent. Mr.
Clinton quietly tended to paperwork. But the loss hurt him
deeply, marked him, changed him. His friends told him to move
to a state where he would be appreciated, but Mr. Clinton
decided to stay and fight and recover. He's now in his fifth
term as governor, about to become the longest-reigning chief
executive in Arkansas history.
   Cerebral -- he once read nearly 300 books in a single year
-- and informal -- he delights in wearing a rubber witch's
mask at Halloween while Little Rock's grandees stroll through
the governor's mansion -- the mature Bill Clinton was shaped
by two events, one he witnessed and one he didn't. The one he
lived through was his own re-election defeat, the shattering
of a dream and, it seemed, of a career. The one he never saw,
some three months before he was born, was the death of his
father, thrown from his car on a wet, isolated stretch of
highway in southeastern Missouri.
   And so if he sometimes seemed a young man in a hurry,
there was a reason. "By the time I was governor at 32 I had
already lived three years longer than my father," says Mr.
Clinton, now 45 years old. "To me, I wasn't a young man."
   His earliest recollection, seared into his memory, was of
his mother at a New Orleans station platform, on her knees,
sobbing as he pulled away in a train. She was in nursing
school, and young Bill was there on a visit with his
grandparents, who were raising him in Hope, Ark. All along he
missed having a father. "It's a sad place inside me," he
says.
   And though his grandmother tacked playing cards on the
window in front of his high chair to teach him to count and
had him reading by the time he was three, it was his mother
-- a woman of strength and sadness who has buried three
husbands -- who taught him to think.
   From the start, William Jefferson Blythe IV -- he sneaked
off to a chancery judge at 15 to take the name Clinton, his
stepfather's -- was an introspective young man; his best
friend once said he didn't want to go over to the Clintons'
house and watch Bill read. The neighborhood kids leaned
against the kitchen cabinets in the house on Scully Street as
his mother presided at discussions that sometimes spilled
over to debates at Cook's ice-cream parlor and, later, the
old Aloha Lounge.
   They talked about basketball and dating. But this was the
South, in the years just after troops were called out to
integrate the Little Rock schools. Larger issues were part of
their everyday lives: racial problems, the nature of justice.
"So early the wheels were turning about what was wrong in the
world," says David Leopoulos, who grew up with him here, and
he carried a concern about racial justice into adulthood.
   Mr. Clinton remembers that his grandparents, who owned a
grocery store in the black section of Hope, were
"instinctively opposed to segregation." The Hot Springs
schools were segregated -- he graduated from high school in
1964 -- but he was part of a small group of white students
who regarded the system as unjust. "Bill was quite explicit
about it: He thought this was totally unfair, wrong," says
Glenda Johnson Cooper, one of his classmates who recalled
that not all his schoolmates agreed. He prided himself for
knowing Martin Luther King's "I Have A Dream" speech by
heart.
   Once a year a photographer came to Hot Springs from
Dallas, and the portraits, slightly yellow now, show a
big-cheeked youngster, somewhat on the pudgy side, with
unruly hair. But there was ferment inside.
   As a young man, he overachieved at overachieving. Though
he was reared in a community that not only tolerated but
promoted illegal gambling -- craps and blackjack games
flourished in Hot Springs in those years, and slot machines
were as common as cigarette machines -- Billy Clinton was a
model citizen. He was the band major, won the Elks Youth
Leadership Award, took calculus and honors English, helped a
friend survive physics and went to Boys State and Boys
Nation. When he invited friends over, he would ask them to
bring their newspaper so he could do the crossword puzzle. He
rushes through the puzzles today in ink, not pencil.
   The competitive streak that his schoolmates noted in the
boy remained with him as a man and, if anything, has been
amplified by being on the ballot 17 times in the past 17
years.
   Years ago he would delight in announcing to his mother
that he had beaten Jim McDougal in a math test. Last year
when a group of friends impulsively set out for a midday
round of miniature golf, the men came straight from the
office in their business suits. Mr. Clinton changed into a
golf shirt; he didn't want his Putt-Putt score to be affected
by the 100-degree heat. Even his security guard says the
governor plays cards with relentless intensity.
   For a man so extroverted, Mr. Clinton is remarkably
inner-directed, sometimes examining his own life with a zoom
lens, sometimes with a microscope. His conclusions can be
jarring, even discomfiting.
   "I had been living with the idea of my father's death, and
therefore my own mortality, since I was a kid," he says, "and
that's maybe why I competed so hard and wanted so much."
Indeed, on his honeymoon he read Ernest Becker's meditations
on death, chock full of critiques on Freud and Kierkegaard.
   Throughout his life Mr. Clinton has been surrounded by
strong women, first his mother, who at 68 still works as an
office nurse and who follows the horses from her home amid
the wisteria here in Hot Springs, and later his wife, who
finally came to call herself Hillary Clinton and with whom
Mr. Clinton has shared an intellectually rich if sometimes
tempestuous relationship.
   "We were in wars -- campaigns, everything else -- from the
beginning," he says, "and if it wasn't easy, it was always
good."
   Today Mr. Clinton refuses to answer "have-you-ever?"
questions about his marriage and personal life. Those who
know the couple say that the Clintons have had rocky times --
problems that led political foes and even some admirers to
describe Mr. Clinton as a womanizer. Mr. Clinton acknowledges
that his marriage hasn't been free of difficulties; he
parries and, he hopes, dismisses the charges with a simple
assertion: "Anybody who knows us knows we love each other and
are committed to our child."
   Even so, the early days of his presidential campaign have
been so shadowed by talk about marital infidelities that he
has been forced to address the question, even taking the
unusual step of having his wife accompany him to a breakfast
with political reporters in Washington last month. His
advisers are plainly, even openly, worried that this question
will be a distraction to the campaign, perhaps even an open
political wound.
   Those who know Mr. Clinton well insist the couple have
worked through the difficulties in their relationship.
   The Clintons met at Yale Law School, where Mr. Clinton was
known for his boasts that his first hometown, Hope, grew the
largest watermelons in the world, and where Hillary Rodham
was known as a brilliant student. His first impression was
that she looked like "an interesting woman," attractive but a
bit forbidding, and he remembers staring at her for weeks.
Finally, she broke the ice.
   Guido Calabresi, now the dean of the Yale Law School,
remembers Hillary as a scholar, adding that Bill -- "highly
idealistic, mildly conservative, with passionate cares" --
was marked for Cabinet meetings, not partners' meetings. "A
lot of kids at Yale wanted to go into politics," says Lovida
Coleman Jr., a Washington lawyer who knew Mr. Clinton in law
school, "but Bill was the only one who didn't posture about
it, the only one to whom it came naturally."
   As law school ended, John Doar, counsel for the Nixon
impeachment committee, asked Mr. Clinton to join his staff.
It was one of the biggest plums on the tree, but Mr. Clinton,
fatefully, decided not to reach for it. He wanted to return
home and run for office.
   Hillary took the job instead, and after President Nixon
resigned and Bill had moved south she faced the decision she
had put off for so long. "I was going to have to make this
choice," remembers Mrs. Clinton, who had never even known
anyone from Arkansas. "It was never in the game plan to grow
up and fall in love with someone from Arkansas."
   She decided to "take the chance," and moved to
Fayetteville, where Mr. Clinton was teaching at the
University of Arkansas Law School and preparing a valiant but
unsuccessful challenge to GOP Rep. John Paul Hammerschmidt.
They became one of the hottest couples in Fayetteville, two
intellectual powerhouses in a town so small that Hillary once
dialed directory assistance only to be told by the operator
that the person she wanted was away for the weekend.
   Mr. Clinton, who had seen some of the world during an
internship with Senate Foreign Relations Chairman J. William
Fulbright of Arkansas and during a Rhodes Scholarship, had
big ideas. "He came back to Arkansas full of idealism and
ambition," says James Blair, the general counsel of Tysons
Foods, who used to talk late into the night with Mr. Clinton
at a local pizza parlor. "He thought Arkansas could be
improved, and that he could do a lot of good."
   Mr. Clinton was elected attorney general, battled
corporations and the 25-cent telephone call, and was
catapulted to the governor's office. His Little Rock idyll
was ruined both by what he has come to call "a young man's
mistakes" and the rioting of Cuban refugees at Fort Chaffee,
which occurred during his tenure. "He was young and he was
convinced of what was right and he wanted to get it done
immediately," says Webster Hubbell, a former Arkansas Supreme
Court chief justice who is one of Mr. Clinton's closest
friends.
   Once back in office two years later, Mr. Clinton developed
the style he would take to the White House if elected:
accommodating, adept at forming consensus, conciliatory --
but chary of confrontation. He's personally approachable, yet
his office can be inaccessible; lobbyists say his personal
bureaucracy is so impenetrable they sometimes resort to
leaving things off at the governor's mansion.
   Mr. Clinton's biggest impact has been in raising education
spending and standards. He put his wife at the head of the
effort and the two of them stumped the state. He fought
entrenched interests, including the Arkansas Education
Association, threatening to veto a sales-tax increase that
provided teacher raises. He staked his career on it; as a
young man he had come back from Georgetown wondering why
people in Arkansas didn't have the same educational
opportunities that his college classmates did. "I saw the
light bulb go off at age 19 to want to fix that," remembers
Carolyn Yeldell Staley, who grew up with him in Hot Springs.
   In the early 1980s came another milestone, the birth of
his daughter, Chelsea. "I got a great gift my father never
had," he says now. "I got to see my child."
   He takes his parental responsibilities seriously, telling
Burt Reynolds he wouldn't join him at Evening Shade High
School because Chelsea had a dance recital that night. He
says he didn't run for president in 1988 because his daughter
wasn't old enough to handle the separation. She's 11 now, and
Mr. Clinton says she's ready.
   Mr. Clinton is older, too. He's had some sobering
experiences; his half-brother served a prison term for
selling cocaine. He's more prone to compromise and more
willing to delegate. Critics say he's been too eager to make
peace with the state's leading economic powers and is more
effective at national conferences on child care and welfare
reform than he has been at home, where making major strides
in a poor, tradition-bound state is difficult. But he is also
more relaxed, more patient, than he was when he was younger.
   "I spent most of my life being a boy wonder," says Bill
Clinton, "and it was much overrated."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

