
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880701-0160 </DOCNO>
<HL> Law Limiting Use of Lie Detectors Is Seen Having Widespread Effect </HL>
<AUTHOR> Albert R. Karr (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> LABOR </CO>
<G> EXE CNG JUS LBR </G>
<TEXT>
   Employees at businesses ranging from retail operations to Wall Street brokerage firms will soon be much less likely to have to play truth or consequences with lie detectors. 

   A bill signed into law Monday by President Reagan will sharply restrict employers' use of polygraph tests. 
Currently, about two million U.S. workers annually take such tests when applying for jobs or when companies are investigating theft or other employee violations. 

   The new law, which becomes effective on Dec. 27, bars pre-hiring polygraph screening and random testing, and it sets strict rules about giving the tests to workers suspected of a particular wrongdoing. 
Some businesses, including pharmaceutical companies and many firms that provide security guards for operations related to "health and safety," are exempt from the ban. 

   Critics of polygraph testing, who claim it's both unreliable and subject to potential abuse, are welcoming the restrictions. 
But many employers -- as well as many of the outside companies that typically administer the tests -- argue that the measure will crimp security. 
They insist that lie detectors are a useful, and even necessary, tool in curbing employee crime. 

   Because of the new law, employers who have relied heavily on lie detectors will have to resort to such alternatives as written tests that are designed to gauge a person's honesty, and background checks of job applicants -- something that critics of polygraphs say they should have been doing in the first place. 

   A broad range of workers will be affected by the new law. 
Wall Street firms, for example, commonly use lie detectors for investigations and pre-employment interviews, mainly of individuals who are likely to deal with confidential information. 

   Such testing isn't confined to low-level employees, according to the Securities Industry Association. 
Managers and other white-collar workers in the securities industry have been subject to polygraph tests where circumstances warrant, the trade group says, adding that the decision to test hinges on the employee's "access to negotiable instruments, currency or securities -- not on the employee's rank." 

   While he was chairman of the Securities &amp; Exchange Commission, John Shad testified in a congressional hearing on polygraph testing that brokerage houses need to keep using lie detectors to protect "trillions of dollars" of securities. 

   Widespread polygraph testing of bank workers and executives will also be curtailed. 
A survey of some 160 large banks, taken about 18 months ago by the Bank Administration Institute at a bank-security seminar, found that 78% of the banks used polygraphs to check up on their employees. 
This, the trade group says, is far more than the percentage that undertake background investigations, criminal-record checks or urine testing for drug use. 

   The law is expected to have a significant impact as well on the companies that actually administer the tests. 
Victor Kaufman, president of New York Lie Detection Laboratories, a security-services firm whose clients include a number of brokerage houses, figures the law will "knock out about 98% of our polygraph business." 
Mr. Kaufman asserts that even the use of lie-detector tests when there has been a theft, which will still be permitted under the new law, will end because employers will have to do such things as give an employee a written statement to the effect that he is "reasonably" suspected of stealing. 

   "That's like buying a lawsuit," Mr. Kaufman says. 
"The first thing you would do when you get a letter like that is go to a lawyer -- after a martini." 

   Some critics of polygraph testing say a major problem with lie detectors is that a conscientious but easily upset truth teller could show the quickened pulse, faster breathing, increased blood pressure and skin reactions that a polygraph typically measures. 
At present, polygraph results generally aren't considered admissible evidence in federal court and are similarly banned in the courts of 27 states. 

   "Polygraph testing and scoring methods currently used in personnel screening have never been shown to be valid tests of truthfulness," said John F. Beary, an assistant dean at Georgetown University School of Medicine, in recent testimony before Congress for the American Medical Association. 
"The polygraph," he added, "cannot detect lies much better than a coin toss." 

   While polygraph specialists say the devices can achieve 90% accuracy, critics contend that the accuracy rate can be as low as 25% and that a tough-minded liar can often control himself well enough to pass the test. 
Gary Lynch, the director of enforcement at the SEC, recalls some investment bankers who passed their polygraph tests with flying colors during insider-trading probes. 
They later became cooperative witnesses for the commission, Mr. Lynch says, and "it turns out they were lying" to the lie detector. 

   One banker who will be glad of the new restrictions is Peter Persaud, who says he was denied a job as a vice president of Amerifirst Bank in Miami after twice flunking polygraph tests early this year. 

   Mr. Persaud alleges in an interview that the young woman examiner who gave him the first test for Amerifirst made him angry by persistently asking questions about stealing and kickbacks; by seeming incredulous when he said that he had no credit-card debt and a mortgage on only one of his three houses; and by implying that he had earlier told her his name was George. 
The second examiner asked similar questions, he claims, provoking more anger. 

   "I think the polygraph test is designed to make an honest person seem dishonest because of the way it is administered," Mr. Persaud says. 
Amerifirst says it doesn't comment on confidential matters involving job applicants. 

   Other employees, too, cite problems arising from polygraph tests. 
Michael Darby, a former manager of a Zale Corp. jewelry store in Duluth, Ga., says that after Zale had a theft problem in an Atlanta store in 1986, the company gave lie detector tests to all of its employees. 
Mr. Darby says he took the test for fear he would be dismissed if he didn't. 
Testifying before Congress in support of the bill, he alleged that the examiners pressured him into writing down any gossip he had heard about the conduct of other Zale workers -- including drug use -- by telling him he would flunk the test and be fired if he didn't comply. 
Mr. Darby quit, vowing he would never take another polygraph exam. 

   Zale says it doesn't comment on former employees. 
Zale's policy, a spokeswoman explains, is to do "very selective" polygraph testing during an investigation of suspected theft or loss. 
The company stopped pre-employment tests last year, the spokeswoman notes. 

   The bill to ban most polygraph tests was widely backed by civil-liberties groups, labor unions and Labor Secretary Ann McLaughlin, as well as by such organizations as the AMA and the American Psychological Association. 
Among the opponents was the Justice Department, which tried to persuade President Reagan to veto the bill. 

   In Congress, the legislation passed with bipartisan support. 
Sen. Edward Kennedy, the liberal Massachusetts Democrat who heads the Senate Labor Committee, calls polygraphs "20th-century witchcraft." 
Conservative Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah, the committee's ranking Republican, says 500,000 "honest people each year are branded as liars" by false lie-detector results. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>

