
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870611-0085 </DOCNO>
<HL> House Labor Panel Clears Bill to Bar
Use of Lie-Detector Tests by Employers
---
By Albert R. Karr
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 06/11/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> LABOR
CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The House Labor Committee approved a bill that would prohibit private employers from using lie detectors to test workers. 

   The panel voted 25-9 for the measure, which is bitterly opposed by many companies, especially pharmaceutical concerns, banks, retailers and other service-industry employers. 
Unions, especially in food and related industries, have pushed for the legislation, contending that polygraphs are unreliable in showing a person's veracity, and are an invasion of workers' privacy. 

   Before approving the bill, the Labor Committee rejected a spate of amendments that would have exempted pharmaceutical, nursing and day care, security-guard and other businesses from the polygraph ban. 
"We don't accept the legitimacy of the device," so there shouldn't be any exemptions, said Ernest Dubester, an AFL-CIO lobbyist. 

   Rather than limit the legislation's curb on polygraph use, the committee adopted by voice vote an amendment offered by Rep. Pat Williams (D., Mont.) that would also prohibit use of such equipment as voice-stress analyzers, but would allow written and oral tests, that are aimed at detecting employee deception. 

   The polygraph bill is one of several labor-backed measures that are picking up steam in Congress after having stalled in past sessions. 
Last year, the House passed a similar lie-detector bill, and the Senate Labor Committee approved its own version. 
But some Republican senators, aided by a veto threat by President Reagan and sizable business opposition, kept the measure off the Senate floor. 

   The Senate is expected soon to produce a new polygraph bill, which may be narrower than the House bill. 
Drafters of the Senate measure are considering limiting the use of lie detectors to workers who are suspects for a specific criminal act, for example, while prohibiting its general use in pre-employment screening or for random testing. 
Critics of polygraph testing contend that tests are especially unreliable when they're used in such general ways. 

   Permitting limited polygraph tests might garner business support that could gain White House backing for the bill, a Senate Labor panel official said. 
Among the options being considered are an outright ban as in the House bill, regulating polygraph use instead of prohibiting it, or letting employers request that workers take a lie-detector test. 

   Banning polygraph use by private employers would affect about 98% of its use, the AFL-CIO's Mr. Dubester said, while allowing government intelligence and other agencies to continue testing of employees in especially sensitive work. 
The prohibition would follow a trend set by many states; 31 states now have laws either banning or regulating the use of polygraphs. 

   But prohibiting polygraphs would strip many employers of a useful tool for fighting rising worker crime, either by uncovering employee theft, or by deterring job applicants or current employees from illegal acts, said Mark de Bernardo, labor-law official for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 
He said that Congress in 1985 allowed the Defense Department to expand polygraph screening of personnel with access to sensitive classified information. 

   It's "ironic," he said, that many lawmakers favor a ban on private polygraph use though they voted for allowing more military usage. 
"If it's useful and reliable, it's useful and reliable across the board," Mr. de Bernardo said. 
The Chamber supports a measure recently introduced by Reps. 
Bill Young (R., Fla.) and George Darden (D., Ga.) that would require licensing and regulation of polygraph operators. 

   Lie detectors can catch wrongdoers and also absolve innocent suspects, Mr. de Bernardo said. 
The Chamber cites estimates by the National Association of Chain Drug Stores that consumers pay 10% to 15% more for goods to cover losses from employee theft, and a Drug Enforcement Administration estimate that as much as one million doses of drugs are stolen annually by pharmacy, drug manufacturer and distributor workers. 
Legal drugs, stolen and distributed without prescriptions, kill or injure twice as many people as illicit drugs, the DEA has said. 

   (Revised June 12, 1987)
</TEXT>
</DOC>

