
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT941-1163</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-EC0AVABTFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>940326
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  26 MAR 94 / Man in the News: Canny operator draws world's eye - Alan
Greenspan / The political skills of the US Federal Reserve chairman are
being tested
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL PROWSE
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
As US interest rates rose another notch this week, traders in London and
other European financial centres were reminded that the German Bundesbank is
not the only star in the monetary firmament. The US Federal Reserve is still
the world's most powerful central bank and its decision to start tightening
monetary policy while many of America's trading partners are still
economically depressed has sent shivers through bond markets from New York
to Tokyo.
It has also irritated the White House, which believes the Fed may be
overreacting to what are still only tentative signs of mild upward pressure
on inflation. Last week, President Bill Clinton summoned Mr Alan Greenspan,
the Fed chairman, to the White House for talks on economic policy. In
financial markets the ill-timed meeting was seen (perhaps unfairly) as a
blatant attempt to put pressure on Mr Greenspan. The Fed would probably have
increased rates anyway this week, but the administration's clumsy
intervention settled matters since inaction would have raised doubts about
the Fed's independence.
Critics fear that a tighter US monetary policy will slow the pace of
economic recovery which, on Main Street, is seen as having only just got
going. US banks are already raising their prime lending rates and mortgage
rates are up sharply, reflecting the steep increase in bond yields. The
Fed's action need not have much impact on growth overseas, but probably will
because European central banks are reluctant to see their currencies
depreciate against the dollar. To prevent depreciation, they may postpone or
abandon planned rate cuts.
Although the White House and the Fed disagree on policy, there is little
sign of personal animosity. As policymakers Mr Clinton and Mr Greenspan
share a love of detail; there is every sign that the White House appreciates
the quality of Mr Greenspan's economic advice, which many regard as the best
available in Washington. The Fed chief, a Reagan appointee in a city run by
Democrats, has also deliberately courted the Clintons. He sat next to
Hillary Rodham Clinton during the presentation of the White House economic
plan to Congress last year and subsequently pronounced the deficit-cutting
measures 'credible'.
Since the plan included the biggest tax increase on the wealthy in decades,
conservatives were infuriated. It seemed a strange lapse for a former
disciple of Ayn Rand, the ultra-libertarian author. But it stood Mr
Greenspan, a canny political operator, in good stead. So far, Mr Clinton has
refused to support congressional calls for legislation to reduce the Fed's
independence. And he has offered only lukewarm support for a Treasury plan
to strip the Fed of its powers as a bank regulator. Even on interest rates,
Mr Clinton is showing more restraint than George Bush, so far expressing
only mild misgivings in public about Fed policy.
Mr Greenspan has thus played his cards shrewdly. Administration officials
doubtless also appreciate the fact that the Fed chief, the most powerful
figure in international finance, is so willing to keep out of the public
eye. A fixture on the Washington media and political cocktail circuit (his
girlfriend Ms Andrea Mitchell is a reporter for NBC television), he often
meets privately with journalists. But he refuses to give on-the-record
interviews and unlike other top economic officials he never appears on TV
shows. The public knows him mainly through his dry, rather technical
testimony before congressional committees. The image he cultivates is of a
courteous, knowledgeable and pragmatic civil servant.
Occasionally, however, Mr Greenspan lets slip his private views and these
suggest a more radical temperament. For example, he advocates the abolition
of capital gains tax - not a view shared by many moderate Republicans. And
he recently shocked Democrats by admitting he was a bit of a gold bug. He
claimed that the gold price was a good indicator of inflation pressures and
even expressed nostalgia for the financial rigour induced by the 19th
century Gold Standard.
His views on the role of central banks are sometimes misunderstood. When Mr
Gordon Brown, the UK shadow chancellor, passed through Washington recently,
he naturally called on Mr Greenspan. Mr Brown's aides came out of the
meeting deeply impressed - Mr Greenspan apparently said the task of a
central banks was to promote economic growth as well as to control
inflation, thus distancing himself from the sterner rhetoric of his European
colleagues.
Sensitive to his audience, Mr Greenspan probably failed to add that his
recipe for stimulating growth is to push for zero inflation or 'price
stability' - not a policy that the British Labour party is likely to
endorse. Mr Greenspan defines price stability as inflation so low that it
can be ignored because it no longer interferes with the microeconomic role
of relative prices in guiding resource allocation. He does not think the US
has yet reached this goal even though many economists believe the true rate
of inflation is lower than the 2.5 per cent to 3 per cent shown by the
consumer price index.
If Mr Greenspan fears anything more than inflation, it is financial
instability. He reacted to the 1987 stock market crash in textbook fashion
by making unlimited liquidity available to endangered financial
institutions. He cut interest rates more rapidly in the early 1990s than
most central banks thought prudent because he feared the combination of
excessive borrowing in the 1980s and falling real estate prices might
threaten the stability of the US banking system. With hindsight the Fed's
policy looks finely judged: the US has emerged strongly from recession and
inflation, so far, has stayed subdued.
Cutting interest rates is easy. But Mr Greenspan has now embarked on what
may prove a long upward path. During the recession his 'gradualist' approach
 -lots of small quarter or, occasionally, half point interest rate cuts -
worked well. If the financial markets discounted future cuts all well and
good: share and bond prices simply surged, providing an additional economic
stimulus. But Mr Greenspan is now discovering that gradualism on the way up
is a little more problematic.
The Fed hoped that by raising short-term rates promptly it would convince
markets that it was serious about preventing a resurgence of inflation as
the recovery matures. In theory greater confidence that inflation would
remain low ought to have countered upward pressure on long bond yields
caused by higher borrowing needs as companies expand capacity to meet
increased demand. But this has not happened mainly because markets are
betting that Mr Greenspan's gradualist strategy will involve many future
rate rises.
Some Wall Street analysts are urging the Fed to act more boldly. If, instead
of nudging rates higher, Mr Greenspan quickly raised rates to a 'neutral'
level consistent with sustainable non-inflationary growth, say 4-5 per cent,
markets might regain their composure. On this view, nothing is more
destabilising than the present 'drip drip' approach which critics dub
Chinese water torture.
While occasionally quibbling with his judgments, Wall Street nevertheless
regards Mr Greenspan as a class act. He has more than filled the shoes of
his admired predecessor Paul Volcker, partly because he brought diverse
qualities to the top Fed job: intimate knowledge of financial markets
gleaned from decades as a Wall Street consultant, mastery of economic
theory, and prior experience in public service - during the mid-1970s he was
chairman of Gerald Ford's council of economic advisers.
None of the people mentioned by Clinton aides as possible successors can
match this experience - another reason why nerves are on edge in financial
markets. For example, Mr Robert Rubin, the director of the National Economic
Council, is a respected former co-chairman of Goldman Sachs, but he lacks Mr
Greenspan's economic expertise. Mr Larry Summers, the Treasury
undersecretary, is another potential candidate, but he lacks practical
experience of financial markets. And although he was an economics professor
he has a reputation as an inflation dove.
Mr Greenspan's critics should perhaps realise that the financial outlook
would be darker if he were less eager to nip inflation in the bud. US
interest rates might not be rising now, but if the economy was allowed to
hurtle into capacity constraints, they would eventually be forced into the
stratosphere. Unless Mr Clinton makes an inspired choice (which could
involve reaching out to a Republican), the expiration in 1996 of Mr
Greenspan's second term as Fed chairman could spell the end of a long period
of US monetary stability.
</TEXT>
<XX>
Countries:-
</XX>
<CN>USZ  United States of America.
</CN>
<XX>
Industries:-
</XX>
<IN>P6011 Federal Reserve Banks.
    P9311 Finance, Taxation, and Monetary Policy.
</IN>
<XX>
Types:-
</XX>
<TP>PEOP  People.
    CMMT  Comment &amp; Analysis.
</TP>
<XX>
People:-
</XX>
<PE>Greenspan, A Federal Reserve Chairman US.
</PE>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 8
</PAGE>
</DOC>

