
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ891026-0063 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 891026 </DD>
<AN> 891026-0063. </AN>
<HL> Boomtown, Nev.:
@  Las Vegas Developers
@  Build `Theme' Resorts
@  To Lure Family Trade
@  ---
@  Circus Circus Erects a Castle,
@  MGM Plans a Movieland;
@  But Is the Market There?
@  ---
@  White Tigers, Siegfried &amp; Roy
@  ----
@  By Pauline Yoshihashi
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 10/26/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<CO> GNG CIR MGMG CAW RAM BLY </CO>
<IN> REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC) </IN>
<DATELINE> LAS VEGAS, Nev.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A volcano will erupt next month on the fabled Strip: a 60-foot mountain spewing smoke and flame every five minutes. 

   The man-made inferno will tower over a man-made lagoon with more than four acres of pools, grottoes and waterfalls. 
Visitors, whisked from the Strip on a moving walkway, will glide over a habitat for rare white tigers, which will star in performances by the famed illusionist team of Siegfried &amp; Roy. 
Nearby, six dolphins will frolic in a 1.5 million-gallon saltwater aquarium. 

   At the core of all this stands a hotel. 
In the lobby behind its nine-story, orchid-strewn atrium, a 20,000-gallon aquarium will come alive with sharks, stingrays, angelfish, puffers and other creatures of the deep. 

   And oh, yes. 
There's a casino, the financial heart of it all. 

   This is the Mirage, a $630 million island-fantasy hotel-casino now being completed for opening in November by Golden Nugget Inc. 
It's the most stunning example of Las Vegas's concerted effort to transform itself into a world-famous vacation resort for families as well as gamblers. 
Las Vegas has seen nothing quite like it before. 

   Not for 15 years has a big new hotel-casino opened here. 
Now the Mirage and Circus Circus Enterprises Inc.'s $290 million Excalibur are going up. 
The Excalibur, with a castlelike hotel, jousting tournaments and other Arthurian attractions, will be able to handle up to 30,000 visitors a day when it opens in 1990. 

   If MGM Grand Inc. proceeds with its plan for an amusement park -- a $700 million movieland resort with a working studio, casino and 5,000-room hotel that would become Las Vegas's biggest -- the investment in the three properties will total some $1.6 billion. 
MGM Grand has agreed to buy a 117-acre site for the resort for $93 million in cash plus stock currently valued at nearly $30 million. 

   Smaller projects swell the figure to at least $2.5 billion. 
Still other projects that have been announced but not yet started could put expenditures above $3 billion over the next few years. 

   Stephen A. Wynn, who owns 29.4% of Golden Nugget's shares, says the Mirage and other projects will help Las Vegas attract a whole new generation of visitors. 
"If you create a wonderment, if you create something so exciting that the public dreams of being part of it, then they'll come," he says. 
The projects already under construction will increase Las Vegas's supply of hotel rooms by 11,795, or nearly 20%, to 75,500. 
By a rule of thumb of 1.5 new jobs for each new hotel room, Clark County will have nearly 18,000 new jobs. 
The county at the end of 1988 had 307,000 jobs, 95,400 of them in the tourist industry. 
Projects in the talking or blueprint stage would add a further 48,000 rooms. 

   Hotel-casino operators play down the possibility of a labor shortage. 
After all, 40,000 newcomers a year are settling in the Las Vegas Valley. 
But Nevada state labor economists think a shortage is probable. 

   Nobody yet seems to have calculated the total number of slot machines, crap tables or roulette wheels Las Vegas will add to the enormous store that Lady Luck already guards here, much less the ultimate impact of the growth on schools and municipal services. 

   "Traffic is certainly a concern, as is pollution, water and an adequate labor market," says Frank Sain, executive director of the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Bureau. 
City fathers have managed to push through projects that are crucial for tourist growth, such as the expansion of McCarran International Airport to accommodate the 44% of Las Vegas tourists who fly here. 
This year, by one means of transport or another, more than 18 million people will visit the city. 

   The expansion will set off a marketing war among the big hotel-casinos. 
Las Vegas promises, or threatens, to become a giant carnival, with rooms to be had for $45 a day or less, for visitors uninspired solely by gambling. 
Amid a riot of jousting knights, circus clowns, gold-leaf centurions and creatures of the wild, lesser competitors will fall. 

   Caesars World Inc. plans to defend its august reputation by sinking $190 million into its opulent Caesars Palace, next door to the new Mirage, and adding a $100 million shopping area reminiscent of Rodeo Drive. 
The Palace, with its marble fountains and toga parties for high rollers, is already well-known for its Caesarean theme. 
The Flamingo Hilton, Imperial Palace, Frontier and others are pouring millions of dollars into facelifts, new room towers and casino floor space just to keep up. 

   Where's this huge amount of investment capital coming from? 
Golden Nugget, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s first casino client, has borrowed on more than $600 million worth of mortgage notes, mostly sold to private investors by Drexel, to build the Mirage. 
Other casino owners, Circus Circus among them, are financing their expansion with their own cash and revolving credit lines from local lenders such as First Interstate Bank of Nevada. 

   Will the investments pay off? 
The growth of Las Vegas tourism in recent years persuades lenders that they will. 
Casino revenues and hotel occupancy rates are high. 
Last year, the tourists left $3 billion with the area's casinos, nearly 10% more than in 1987. 
The people with a stake in Nevada's gambling industry believe that they have barely tapped the potentially huge family trade. 

   "If you build a better mousetrap, it will catch more mice," says Fred Benninger, chairman of MGM Grand. 
Ellen Cokely, a tourist from Alton, Ill., seems inclined to agree. 
"I'd love it if my daughter had something else to do here," says Ms. Cokely, watching seven-year-old Kristin on the water slide at the Strip's Wet `n' Wild water park. 

   "Two generations ago, Dad came to Las Vegas by himself for a little diversion," says Van Heffner, executive vice president of the Nevada Hotel and Motel Association. 
"One generation ago, Mom joined Dad. 
Now, in the `90s, we're headed toward a total resort environment." 

   Only a decade or so ago, casino managers balked at in-room TV sets and other fripperies that distracted from gambling. 
Casinos today offer bowling alleys, water parks, golf courses, tennis courts, lush swimming pools and other diversions, and more such facilities are being designed. 

   Despite the new emphasis on the family trade, however, tourists in search of naughtier fun than gambling seem certain to find it, with Las Vegas call girls remaining on the scene. 

   A serious economic downturn, pessimists observe, could hurt the expansionists. 
For now, however, the naysayers' voices are drowned by the roar of cement mixers and the clanging of construction cranes along the Strip. 
This is no place for pedestrians, but at 7:30 on a recent morning, when construction choked traffic at the famous Four Corners intersection to one lane, a taxi passenger found it faster to abandon the cab and walk to her destination. 

   The ferocious competition probably will drive some poorly managed properties into bankruptcy or new ownership. 
It has happened before. 
The Dunes, the Aladdin and the Riviera were all acquired by the present owners from bankruptcy proceedings spawned by the last recession, in the early 1980s. 

   Yet that hasn't discouraged investors. 
Some have bought big chunks of Strip property for what may turn into another wave of building. 
Atlantic City casino owner Donald Trump is scouting the Las Vegas market with an eye toward building an appropriately spectacular place. 

   Even before the huge new projects began, the Strip's recent expansion squeezed smaller competitors. 
Many blue-collar customers of downtown's no-frills gambling spots have been lured to the Strip or to Laughlin, Nev., a Colorado River town catering to snowbirds and the recreational-vehicle crowd. 
Hotel expansion and an influx of more-discriminating tourists have hurt motels. 
Since 1979, the number of motel rooms has fallen by 17,000. 

   Many people here expect a room-rate war as the new projects open. 
"There's probably going to be some pressure on occupancy and room rates over the next year, but after that you should see the market return to 80%-plus occupancy and regular rates," says Paul Rubeli, casino executive at Ramada Inc., which runs the Tropicana. 

   Skeptics wonder whether mega-resorts such as the Mirage will be able to squeeze a profit from their cash flow. 
The Mirage will cost at least $1 million a day to operate. 
Mr. Wynn seems confident that it will produce a healthy profit, but some securities analysts doubt it. 
Competitors and analysts say that among large existing properties Bally Manufacturing Corp.'s Bally Grand hotel-casino probably will be hardest hit among major properties. 
Bally officials decline to discuss the situation. 

   Bally bought the former MGM Grand hotel-casino from Kirk Kerkorian four years ago. 
Only now is it undergoing a badly needed facelift. 
Its parking lot is inconvenient, the MGM lion's-head logo still appears in places, and customers still call it the Grand, rather than the Bally Grand. 
It has a "great location, but they're going to have some real problems when everyone around them opens," says Daniel Lee, a Drexel analyst. 
Older properties that still have a 1950s image are also vulnerable. 

   Any hotel-casino without a strong identity will get whacked by the new competition, says Glenn Schaeffer, senior vice president of Circus Circus. 
"If you don't know what you are, bigger won't make you better," he says. 
"But it'll sure make you poorer." 

   Circus Circus's flagship casino has become the envy of competitors for its ability to vacuum cash from the pockets of vacationing families. 
The Circus Circus lures them with low room rates, inexpensive buffets and entertainment for children at no extra charge. 
The company's Excalibur will also appeal to families, of course. 
Its castle, Mr. Schaeffer says, will be "the most compelling piece of folk architecture ever built." 

   Some casino owners have resisted the temptation to add rooms. 
Instead, they are spending to reinforce the identity that they believe attracts their customers. 
"More rooms aren't the answer for us," says Caesars World chairman Henry Gluck. 
While his company's hotel is building a retail complex in Beverly Hills style and redoing existing rooms, it has decreased the number of its rooms. 
Some have been combined into suites for the high rollers. 

   Caesars has made a specialty of catering to high rollers from abroad, who are also being aggressively courted by the Mirage, the Las Vegas Hilton and others. 
Other, smaller concerns are also pursuing market niches -- Hawaiian tourists, for example, or the local trade. 
"There's still room for boutique properties," says James Barrett, president of MarCor Resorts Inc. Off the Strip, MarCor is building the Rio, a hotel-casino with a Brazilian theme and only 430 rooms -- all of them suites. 

   Despite the proliferation of tourist distractions, Las Vegans haven't forgot that gambling is still what the town is all about. 
"The days when when the thrust of casinos was all high rollers, with no windows and clocks and lots of red and black decor, are gone," Mr. Sain of the visitors' bureau says. 
"But 93% of tourists still come for gambling. 
We can't lose sight of that." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>

