
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ900530-0112
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
900530-0112.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Yeltsin's Win Foreshadows End of Empire
   ----
   By Adrian Karatnycky
</HL>
<DATE>
05/30/90
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<CO>
   FREST
</CO>
<LP>
   The election of Boris Yeltsin to the presidency of the
Russian republic is a stunning personal defeat for Mikhail
Gorbachev. For more than two years, Mr. Gorbachev has used
the propaganda mills of the Communist Party to discredit his
former Politburo colleague. Mr. Yeltsin's victory gives
further impetus to the social and political forces that are
tearing apart the last great empire.
   From the platform of the Russian presidency, Mr. Yeltsin
is certain to strike a triple blow against Mr. Gorbachev's
political line. He will challenge the Soviet president on the
question of economic reform -- Mr. Yeltsin favors a "no" vote
on the Soviet government's referendum on economic austerity.
Mr. Yeltsin will also oppose the policy of imperial
centralism that holds the republics in the thrall of the
central ministries that control nearly 95% of economic
output. As a leader elected by a legislature that is the
product of the most open election the Soviet Union has seen,
he will challenge the legitimacy of Mr. Gorbachev's
presidency, perhaps to the point of forcing a new unionwide
election.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In recent months Mr. Yeltsin has positioned himself as a
tradition-oriented politician looking back to basic Russian
values and lamenting the destruction of the Russian village.
His electoral platform and the movement that supported him --
Democratic Russia -- represents an inward-looking Russian
nationalism that promotes Russia's sovereignty against the
state apparat and has little in common with Russian
imperialism.
   On May 4, while visiting Spain, Mr. Yeltsin criticized Mr.
Gorbachev's blockade of Lithuania. A Spanish newspaper
reported that he also called for the emergence of "an
independent Russian republic" that "as an independent state
would sign agreements with other republics, also as
independent states." In Mr. Yeltsin's view, it would then be
up to the various sovereign republics to determine whether
they should be part of a federation or confederation, or
fully independent.
   Among non-Russian peoples fighting for economic and
political sovereignty, the Yeltsin victory is greeted with
unalloyed delight. One leader of Sajudis, the Lithuanian
independence movement, anticipated Mr. Yeltsin's success when
I met him in late April. "He'll sign a trade agreement
between Russia and Lithuania. He'll challenge the blockade,"
the Lithuanian leader predicted. Just three months ago, in an
interview in an Estonian daily, Mr. Yeltsin came out
four-square for "maximum independence" for the republics.
   Independence-minded Georgians and Azerbaijanis, too,
regard Mr. Yeltsin favorably. He is on record denouncing the
brutal murders of non-Russian demonstrators by Soviet troops
in 1989 and 1990, and has gone after Marshal Dmitri Yazov,
who, says Mr. Yeltsin, "must answer for Tbilisi and Baku."
   Mr. Yeltsin's victory shows how far the process of
democratization and radicalization has gone in the past 15
months. It also shows Mr. Yeltsin's keen political sense. Mr.
Yeltsin and his reformist cohorts scored their electoral
victory in March elections to Russia's Parliament by playing
to a major shift in Russian public opinion, which is warming
to the idea of surrendering domination of non-Russian
peoples.
   There are many important signs of this turn inward. A
public-opinion poll conducted in late February by the Soviet
Academy of Sciences' Institute of Sociology in cities across
the Soviet Union indicated that 52.4% of those polled
supported the right of union republics to secede. Another 14%
partly endorsed this right and only 7% were clearly opposed.
Ethnic Russians are opting out of the empire with their feet
and leaving the non-Russian republics in droves. Between 1979
and 1989, nearly two million citizens -- most of them ethnic
Russians -- left the non-Russian republics to return to the
Russian republic.
   As president of a republic of 147 million, Mr. Yeltsin
will be confronted with a new constituency -- the 25 million
Russians who live in the non-Russian republics. Mr. Yeltsin
realizes that this group could represent a force for the
maintenance of empire. But, to diffuse this time bomb, Mr.
Yeltsin, according to reports in the Soviet press, favors a
"law of return." Such a law would, in effect, include a
transitional program for the orderly withdrawal of worried
Russians from the non-Russian republics.
   On the political front, Mr. Yeltsin will be an advocate of
a multiparty system and an opponent of Lenin's principle of
"democratic centralism." He already has called for
dismantling the Communist Party's vast salaried apparat and
supplanting it with a party based largely on volunteers and
democratically accountable officials. He also will work for
the "depoliticization" of the army, the Interior Ministry and
the KGB "by eliminating the political organs in them" and
breaking officer links with the Communist Party.
   On the economic front, Mr. Yeltsin's thinking is a bit
fuzzier. He opposes half-hearted reforms that impose
austerities on Soviet workers. His economic prescriptions
include a rapid transition to currency convertibility from
the current three-tiered monetary structure. In Mr. Yeltsin's
view, enterprises that produce goods in excess of state
orders could sell their products on the free market. Any
proceeds from sales would be in the form of a single currency
with which enterprises could improve wages, increase capital
investments and purchase needed consumer goods for workers
and for workplace-related educational facilities.
   Whether Mr. Yeltsin is the leader of the future, however,
remains to be seen. While he is popular with the Soviet
public, the new Russian president is regarded by younger
radicals, who backed his bid for office, as a man of limited
ability. He may well turn out to be a Soviet version of Imre
Posgay, the radical Hungarian Communist reformer who laid the
groundwork for democracy in his country in 1989 and then was
defeated in his quest for his country's presidency by an
ungrateful electorate.
   This is the second time that Mikhail Gorbachev embarks on
a U.S. visit while facing a challenge from a formidable
political rival. The last time he was here that rival was the
arch-conservative Yegor Ligachev, whom Mr. Gorbachev would
later outmaneuver and defeat. This time, with Boris Yeltsin,
he may not be as lucky. But at least he's prepared. Just a
couple of weeks ago, the Soviet Parliament passed a law
guaranteeing a pension, "dacha" and private limousine for
retired Soviet presidents.
   ---
   Mr. Karatnycky is director of research at the AFL-CIO's
department of international affairs.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

