
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910822-0021
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910822-0021.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Collapse of the Soviet Coup -- Historic Moment:
   Democratic Forces
   Roll Back Soviet Coup;
   A New Era May Dawn
   ---
   Yeltsin's Power Is Enhanced;
   Gorbachev May Be Left
   In a Secondary Position
   ---
   Challenge for U.S. Diplomacy
   ----
   By Peter Gumbel and Gerald F. Seib
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
ENERGY (ENE)
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)
COAL PRODUCERS (COA)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)
</IN>
<NS>
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)
LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)
TRADE ISSUES (TRD)
</NS>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)
</GV>
<RE>
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)
EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
GERMANY (GE)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
SOVIET UNION (UR)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   MOSCOW -- For the first time since the overthrow of the
Czar in 1917, the Soviet Union has been seized by the
collective will of its people.
   In a dramatic climax to the coup in Moscow, the
hard-liners who took power Monday were forced to capitulate
yesterday by defiant protesters and a determined Russian
Parliament that held firm against tanks and threats. Boris
Yeltsin, the president of the Russian republic, led that
resistance from the embattled parliament building in Moscow
and seemed to tower over the hard-liners during the tense
standoff. He now emerges as easily the most powerful man in
the nation.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   By rallying the general public and parts of the army
against the eight leaders of the coup, Mr. Yeltsin showed
that democratic changes ushered in by President Mikhail
Gorbachev over the past six years have had an enormous -- and
perhaps irreversible -- effect on the U.S.S.R. The defeat of
the hard-liners is widely expected to speed efforts to
transform the Soviet Union into a stronger democracy based on
a new federal system of decentralized power and market
economics. It also provides a unique opportunity for the
nation's legitimate leaders to purge the remains of the old
totalitarian system.
   "The failure of the coup marks the Soviet Union's
transformation into a kind of modern European society," says
Francis Fukuyama, a former State Department official who has
written about the meaning of the collapse of communism. "It
proves that Gorbachev's revolution hasn't been just a
revolution of elites, that there's been this spontaneous
development of a political consensus among Russians."
   But while jubilation filled the streets and squares of
cities throughout the country, and while columns of armored
vehicles retreated from Moscow's center, many people were
cautioning that difficult times lie ahead: The hard-liners
may have been ejected, they say, but the vast problems of
reviving the moribund Soviet economy and streamlining its
central government remain. Both could take years to
accomplish and could usher in new periods of unrest,
particularly in Soviet republics eager to exercise autonomy.
   "There is no stability in the country at the moment, we
recognize that fact," said Foreign Minister Alexander
Bessmertnykh. Restoring coherence to the economy and
government is "the greatest task facing us."
   Mr. Gorbachev's future role in bringing about stability is
uncertain. Late last night, he returned to Moscow from the
Crimea, where he was vacationing when the coup occurred and
where he spent the last three days under house arrest. On
arriving at the Moscow airport, Mr. Gorbachev stepped down
the stairs from his plane, shook hands with waiting aides and
was taken by motorcade to his home.
   In a subsequent television broadcast, a tanned and
vigorous-looking Mr. Gorbachev called the failure of the coup
"a great victory for perestroika." He proclaimed his respect
for the Soviet people and, specifically, Mr. Yeltsin and said
he had been "surrounded" by troops during his house arrest.
"They wanted to break the will of the president and his
family," he said. "But they lost, it just didn't happen." Mr.
Gorbachev said he would describe the details of his house
arrest at a later time when he convenes a "broad conference"
of Soviet leaders.
   But the 60-year-old Soviet president may be surprised by
the circumstances that greet him today, for the balance of
political power in the country has shifted clearly in Mr.
Yeltsin's favor. Thanks to his popular mandate, the feisty
Mr. Yeltsin was able to withstand the very forces that
deposed Mr. Gorbachev, his longtime rival.
   As a result, many people in Moscow are starting to talk
about Mr. Gorbachev in the past tense, predicting he will
play a more symbolic than substantive role in the future.
Some even contend that he will stay on only briefly as an
interim figure, and then be forced out by public opinion. Mr.
Gorbachev himself helped bring about the coup, these people
argue, because he elevated most of its ringleaders to high
posts in his government and kept them there despite dire
warnings from both his detractors and supporters.
   "Gorbachev created the possibilities for such a coup to
take place," says Valery Lunin, a chemistry professor at
Moscow University and member of the Russian Parliament. "He
should resign, although perhaps not at once, and allow
elections to be held."
   Mr. Gorbachev's future now rests largely in his own hands.
If he acts decisively to punish the leaders of the coup and
purge his administration of their supporters, he could regain
some of his popularity, which eroded as the economy worsened
in recent years. But any wavering -- something he has done
often -- could relegate him to a minor role.
   Whatever he does, the Soviet Union seems headed for a
period of fundamental change that could have a major impact
on the way it deals with the outside world. Mr. Yeltsin, 60,
is expected to press relentlessly for the Kremlin to
relinquish most of its administrative powers to the
increasingly assertive republics. For the nation as a whole,
that could create considerable upheaval as newly "sovereign"
republics attempt to build a federal system from the bottom
up.
   For the West, the problem of balancing relations with the
Kremlin and with individual Soviet republics is likely to
worsen. Mr. Yeltsin himself, who has sought a greater voice
in international affairs, clearly relished his contacts with
world leaders during the crisis. He told the Russian
Parliament Wednesday of his conversations with heads of state
ranging from President Bush to France's Francois Mitterrand
and British Prime Minister John Major, proclaiming proudly
that "they all support the Russian leadership."
   The 64-hour coup disintegrated with astonishing speed.
After seizing power and deposing Mr. Gorbachev at 4 a.m.
Monday, the eight-man committee headed by Vice President
Gennady Yanayev and including the Soviet prime minister, the
defense minister, the interior minister and the KGB chief,
soon found the tables turning.
   By Tuesday the regime was under fierce verbal attack not
just from Mr. Yeltsin, but from tens of thousands of Soviet
protesters, the leaders of many republics, and the
governments of virtually every country in the world. The
loyalty of the army was being sorely tested; a handful of
divisions switched sides to protect the Russian leadership in
its parliament building. Even hard-liners who had been
expected to support the junta condemned it for what they
called its "illegal" actions.
   Tuesday night, hundreds of unarmed volunteers stood
outside the white parliament building on the Moskva river,
nervous about rumors of an imminent armed assault. It never
came. At least three civilians were killed in a brief clash
around midnight, when a column of six light tanks stormed a
barricade near the parliament. But the troops quickly backed
off, and the rest of the night was quiet.
   The Russian Parliament convened for an emergency session
Wednesday, and after three hours of debate, Mr. Yeltsin
suddenly announced that the coup leaders were "heading to the
airport for an unknown destination." Amid growing excitement,
he ordered them to be stopped.
   Around the same time, the hundreds of tanks and armored
cars positioned around the Soviet capital started to
withdraw. Russian officials said top Defense Ministry and
general staff brass had issued the order after a brief
meeting.
   Within hours, a delegation of two Russian republic
officials and four Gorbachev aides flew to the Crimea to meet
with the Soviet president. He had been held incommunicado
since the beginning of the coup, guarded by 32 KGB officers
with machine guns in his spacious yellow dacha in Foros, at
the southern tip of the peninsula.
   The hard-line regime had justified its takeover by saying
that Mr. Gorbachev was incapacitated by poor health. The
officials quickly discovered otherwise. Arkady Volsky, a
Gorbachev aide, declared the health problems "a gross
invention." He also reported that the coup had taken place
after the eight-man committee had tried and failed to
pressure Mr. Gorbachev into signing a statement imposing a
state of emergency on the nation.
   By 8 p.m., the coup was officially over and Mr. Gorbachev
announced he was "in full control of the situation and {had}
restored contact with the country, broken off as a result of
the adventurist actions of a group of state officials." After
telephone conversations with leaders of five of the 15 Soviet
republics and with President Bush, Mr. Gorbachev headed for
Moscow from the Crimea.
   Even before the coup ended, the nation started returning
to normal. Soviet television, which had been broadcasting a
diet of classical music and black-and-white patriotic movies
throughout the previous two days, suddenly switched to
showing the Russian Parliament session. Russian radio resumed
its broadcasts, and all restrictions on the media were
lifted. In Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia, Soviet troops
retreated from television and radio stations they occupied
earlier in the week.
   The situation in the Baltic states remained tense,
however: According to news wire reports, gunfire was reported
in Vilnius, Lithuania, where one person was shot dead, and a
Latvian died from injuries received when the Soviets this
week took over the radio station where he worked. Some U.S.
analysts are predicting that the coup and the forces it has
unleashed have dramatically increased the chances that the
Baltic states will win their independence. During the coup,
Estonia and Latvia unilaterally declared their independence,
a move Lithuania took last year but which Soviet troops
thwarted.
   The Soviet federal prosecutor's office, meanwhile,
announced that it had started criminal proceedings against
the eight coup leaders. At one point early yesterday, there
were reports that four of the eight had flown to Mr.
Gorbachev's vacation home in the Crimea to make a personal
appeal to him. But this couldn't be confirmed. Last night,
Reuter reported that Alexander Rutskoi, the vice president of
the Russian republic, said one plotter, Vladimir Kryuchkov,
chairman of the KGB, had been arrested and would be tried.
The whereabouts of the other seven leaders of the coup wasn't
immediately known.
   As news of the rapid developments spread, hundreds of
jubilant Russians braved the rain and streamed toward the
parliament building, which was bedecked in the Russian white,
blue and red national tricolor. "We can say that today is the
last day of Soviet Communism, and it's a rainy one," one
parliament deputy, Yevgeny Ambartsumov, shouted down to the
crowd from a first-floor balcony. "Yeltsin, Yeltsin," the
crowd shouted back.
   But some were already looking to the future, and sounding
more cautious. "A 70-year nightmare doesn't end that
quickly," said Nikolai Medvedev, a member of the national
parliament.
   As the future takes shape for the Soviet Union, one thing
is certain: U.S. relations with the country will never be the
same.
   Over the last three days, Mr. Bush became a vocal partner
of Mr. Yeltsin's in the effort to oust the Communist
hardliners who launched the coup. The U.S. now seems to be
moving inexorably toward recognizing the charismatic Russian
leader as the rising force in the Soviet Union. Mr. Bush, who
has struggled for two years to balance relations between his
friend Mr. Gorbachev and the unabashedly pro-Western Mr.
Yeltsin, confirmed that relations with Mr. Yeltsin will now
be different. "They have taken a quantum leap forward now by
this man's displayed courage and by his commitment to
democracy," he said at a press conference.
   By moving closer to Mr. Yeltsin, the U.S. inevitably will
also be moving closer to his vision for the Soviet Union,
which sees the U.S.S.R. as a political umbrella but Russia
and the other Soviet republics with vastly expanded freedoms
and power; some republics, particularly the Baltic states,
would acquire their complete independence from Moscow. The
triumph of Mr. Yeltsin is also likely to give new impetus to
proposals for truly radical shock therapy for the Soviet
economy, which Mr. Gorbachev avoided.
   But a new relationship with Mr. Yeltsin doesn't mean Mr.
Bush will abandon his friendship with Mr. Gorbachev. In fact,
their personal bond was evident yesterday when Mr. Bush spoke
with the Soviet leader by phone.
   Mr. Bush was in his boat in the waters off his vacation
home in Maine when Mr. Gorbachev finally was able to return
the repeated calls Mr. Bush had made during the coup. Mr.
Bush went ashore and took the call in the bedroom of his
home, with Barbara Bush at his side. Later, he told aides the
conversation was an emotional one in which Mr. Gorbachev was
effusive in his thanks for American support during the
unrest.
   "The personal thing kicked in," says one administration
official. "It was emotional for both of them." Later, an
obviously relieved Mr. Bush declared that "freedom and
democracy have prevailed." And he insisted that there isn't
any "Gorbachev versus Yeltsin battle."
   Moreover, it isn't just Mr. Bush who still has a strong
link to Mr. Gorbachev. If anything, West European leaders
have been even more committed to Mr. Gorbachev. They worry
about any push for radical Soviet changes that might produce
chaos and instability on their eastern borders -- and a
possible halt to the withdrawal of Soviet troops from German
soil.
   That means that an American drift closer to Mr. Yeltsin
isn't risk-free. It could produce strains and differences in
approach between Washington and its European allies if the
drift is too pronounced.
   Still, there probably isn't any way for Mr. Bush to avoid
moving closer to the policies and tactics Mr. Yeltsin
espouses. "Boris Yeltsin's actions during this coup attempt
-- his courage and his ability to exercise charismatic
leadership -- offer the greatest possible hope of some
leadership for the future," said Sen. Richard Lugar
yesterday. "My own view is that, by and large, Gorbachev is a
spent force."
   As it became apparent that the coup was falling apart,
some of those in the Soviet Union who had supported it rushed
for cover. Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov, a member of the
eight-man committee, was said by his deputy to have agreed to
take part in the coup because "he had been misled by the
information on the state of health of the Soviet president."
   Senior officials of the Soviet Communist Party, which is
believed to have played a supporting role in the takeover,
quickly distanced themselves from the coup leaders and
declared the action to have been unlawful. Sensing that
reprisals could be in the air, they also warned against
jumping to hasty conclusions about who is guilty. "Some
forces will probably try to use the situation to strike a
blow at the Soviet Communist Party," said Sergei Kalashnikov,
a nervous secretary of the party's central committee. He said
the coup leaders shouldn't be described as a "junta," but
acknowledged that they had "blundered in a difficult
situation."
   In fact, both sympathizers and opponents of the coup were
united in a belief that the whole affair had been handled
with extraordinary clumsiness. The emergency committee
clearly failed to anticipate the fierce reaction from Mr.
Yeltsin and the general public. And once it came, it seemed
at a loss as to how to deal with it and lacked the nerve to
carry out a bloody assault on the Russian Parliament, the
focus of protest.
   "We must admit that mistakes by the junta let us gather
people and continue disseminating information," said Gleb
Yakunin, a Russian Orthodox priest and reform-minded member
of the Russian Parliament.
   The coup leaders also alienated some potential hard-line
allies by saying they planned to continue with Mr.
Gorbachev's policies. "The committee was created because of
the catastrophic situation in the country caused by
Gorbachev's policies," said Col. Viktor Alksnis, a critic of
the Soviet president and leader of the Soyuz parliamentary
group. "But Yanayev publicly praised Gorbachev. If he {Mr.
Gorbachev} was so good, where was the need to get rid of
him?"
   According to several sources, Marshal Dmitri Yazov, the
defense minister and a member of the eight-man committee, may
have played an important role in bringing about the coup's
collapse. He appears to have had major reservations about
ordering troops to attack the parliament building. "It seems
to me that Yazov was just sucked into a political game. He
didn't want bloodshed," said Konstantin Kobets, the head of
the Russian defense committee who is well connected with the
army's general staff.
   The future of the entire army now seems certain to become
a serious point of contention as Mr. Yeltsin, Mr. Gorbachev
and leaders of the other republics move to build a new
federal structure.
   Until the failed coup, there had been a tacit agreement to
preserve a single army. But the events of the past few days
have driven home to Mr. Yeltsin and his aides how vulnerable
they are without some defense force of their own. Mr. Kobets
and other top Russian officials now talk about the need to
form a Russian national guard. And some radicals want Mr.
Yeltsin to take another, far more critical look at the entire
union treaty he, Mr. Gorbachev and two other republican
leaders had been expected to sign on Tuesday. The treaty is
designed to transfer some powers from the central government
to the republics, and is believed to have precipitated the
coup.
   "Many Russian deputies say they don't want the treaty to
be signed as it stands," says Sergei Belosertsev, a reformist
member of the republic's legislature. "The latest events show
how much still has to be done, including the clauses on the
army. Yeltsin will be wiser after the {coup}. He was in too
much of a hurry before."
   Whatever the fate of the union treaty, Mr. Yeltsin is
already confident about one of its key economic clauses. He
told the Russian Parliament that if the treaty had been
signed, President Gorbachev would have immediately handed
over jurisdiction of all factories in Russia to the republic.
As it turned out, Mr. Yeltsin went ahead and ordered the
transfer himself. He also stole a march on the Soviet
president by firing the head of state-run TV, a notorious
hard-liner.
   For many Russians, though, yesterday was a time to
celebrate, not to worry about the future. As barricades began
to come down, the libations came out. "I'm drunk," said
Stepan Kisilyov, deputy editor of the reformist weekly,
Moscow News, which was banned during the coup. Speaking over
the phone in the early hours of Thursday morning, he added:
"The whole editorial board has been drinking cognac all
night. We won] We won]"
   ---
                      THE AUGUST COUP
                                                                                                       

                      MONDAY, AUG. 19
                                                                                                       

   -- Around dawn in Moscow, an eight-member "State Committee
for the State of Emergency," headed by Vice President Gennady
Yanayev, says it has taken over all power in the Soviet
Union. It Says that Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev has
been replaced because of health reasons. The publication of
major independent newspapers is suspended.
                                                                                                       

   -- Troops move into Moscow, and later seize radio and
television stations in the Baltic republics.
                                                                                                       

   -- Thousands of demonstrators assemble around the Russian
republic's parliament, where Russian President Boris Yeltsin
remains defiant of the coup.
                                                                                                       

   -- Mr. Yeltsin climbs atop a tank outside parliament and
urges a general strike to protest the coup. He warns that
"clouds of terror and dictatorship are gathering over the
whole country," and calls for the restoration of power of mr.
Gorbachev.
                                                                                                       

   -- On Monday morning in Kennebunkport, Maine, President
Bush says the coup is "disturbing" and appears to be
"extra-constitutional." He expresses support for Mr.
Gorbachev and says he will "follow the events very carefully
as they unfold in order to determine the appropriate
response."
                                                                                                       

   -- President Bush later issues a statement from Washington
stiffening his criticism and condemning "the unconstitutional
resort to force." The statement supports Mr. Yeltsin's call
for returning power to legally elected leaders and says the
U.S. "will avoid in every possible way any actions that would
lend legitimacy or support to the coup attempt."
                                                                                                       

                     TUESDAY, AUG. 20
                                                                                                       

   -- In the morning, Bush says he has recently spoken with
Mr. Yeltsin and that he reaffirmed U.S. support for
constitutionally chosen Soviet leaders. Mr. Bush adds that
"there will be no normal relations with the United States as
long as this illegal coup remains in effect."
                                                                                                       

   -- During the day, allied countries halt aid to the Soviet
Union. The European Community freezes action on more than $1
billion in technical aid and credit guarantees. The U.S.
Export-Import Bank suspends its new Soviet program, and
Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu tells his parliament
that export credits will be put on hold.
                                                                                                       

   -- In Moscow, Soviet television reports that Prime
Minister Valentin Pavlov, a member of the emergency
committee, has resigned because of poor health. Reports also
circulate that two other committee members, Defense Minister
Dmitri Yazov and KGB chief Vladimir Kryuchkov, have resigned.
                                                                                                       

   -- The Soviet Foreign Ministry says Foreign Minister
Alexander Bessmertnykh is ill after returing from vacation.
                                                                                                       

   -- Huge crowds in Moldavia, the Ukraine and Leningrad
protest the coup, while coal miners go on strike in several
regions.
                                                                                                       

   -- In the evening in Moscow, demonstrators near the
Russian republic's parliament clash with Soviet armored
vehicles. Soviet radio reports that at least three people are
killed.
                                                                                                       

                    WEDNESDAY, AUG. 21
                                                                                                       

   -- Troops begin moving out of Moscow. Soon the coup
leaders are reported to have left the city.
                                                                                                       

   -- Leaders of the Soviet parliament demand the
reinstatement of Mr. Gorbachev, and the legislature rescinds
the emergency committee's decrees.
                                                                                                       

   -- At 10:30 in the morning EDT, President Bush says he has
spoken with Mr. Yeltsin, who said that more and more troops
appear to be turning against the coup. Mr. Bush declines to
say that the crisis is over, but says the situation appears
"somewhat more positive."
                                                                                                       

   -- Shortly after noon, Mr. Bush says he has spoken to Mr.
Gorbachev, who tells him that "the constitutional authorities
are back in power." Soviet television broadcasts a statement
by Mr. Gorbachev declaring that the coup is dead.
                                                                                                       

                     Yeltsin's Agenda
                                                                                                       

   -- With his triumph over the coup plotters, Russian
President Boris Yeltsin is in a far stronger position to
implement the reform measures for which he has long
campaigned. These measures include:
                                                                                                       

   -- Popular Elections to implement a "genuine democracy"
                                                                                                       

   -- Autonomy for the Soviet republics, a far more
decentralized government with vast powers transferred from
the Communists-dominated Kremlin
                                                                                                       

   -- Faster transition to a market economy with guarantees
of economic freedoms and rapid privatization of agriculture
and industry
                                                                                                       

   -- Dismantling of the stultifying central bureaucracy
                                                                                                       

   -- Lower military spending and greater leeway for
republics to conduct their own foreign policy
</TEXT>
</DOC>

