
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910614-0120
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910614-0120.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   International:
   Yeltsin Wins Russia Republic Presidency
   ---
   Victory Stresses Public's
   Desire for Big Change;
   Bush Issues Invitation
   ----
   By Peter Gumbel
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/14/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6
</SO>
<IN>
COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
</IN>
<NS>
COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)
ACQUISITIONS &amp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
SOVIET UNION (UR)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   MOSCOW -- Boris Yeltsin coasted to a comfortable victory
in the Russian republic's first presidential election, in a
vote that underscored the strong public desire for change and
the dwindling influence of the Soviet Communist
establishment.
   The 60-year-old Mr. Yeltsin, who is promising swift moves
to establish greater democracy and market economics, was
widely tipped to win the election in Russia, which, with 150
million of the Soviet Union's 285 million people, is by far
the country's largest republic. But the ease with which he
was elected in the first round of voting and the poor showing
by his Communist Party rivals gave him a strong mandate for
genuine reform that is likely to have repercussions on the
national political scene.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In Washington, the White House welcomed Mr. Yeltsin's
election, and invited him to meet with President Bush next
Thursday, a meeting Mr. Yeltsin had sought for months. Mr.
Yeltsin was to be in Washington as a guest of the Senate
leadership, but until winning the election he had been
shunned by the White House. On his last trip to the U.S. in
1989, Mr. Bush had only "dropped in" briefly on a meeting Mr.
Yeltsin was holding with National Security adviser Brent
Scowcroft.
   In general, the Bush administration has avoided doing
anything to add to Mr. Yeltsin's stature as a rival to Soviet
President Mikhail Gorbachev, whose strong personal ties to
Mr. Bush underlie current U.S.-Soviet relations. But
administration officials said Mr. Yeltsin's democratic
election, and his new working partnership with Mr. Gorbachev,
have changed the situation.
   Indeed, many analysts believe Mr.Gorbachev now has no
choice but to work with Mr. Yeltsin, his erstwhile rival, to
transform the Soviet Union at a more rapid pace than the
Soviet leader's Communist allies are advocating. The two men
recently put aside their strong personal differences and
started cooperating on a new federal structure that would
decentralize much political and economic power to the
nation's 15 republics.
   Mr. Yeltsin's election "is a gigantic historic step
forward," said Gavriil Popov, the reformist mayor of Moscow.
"It will give additional stimulus to that process" of
cooperation between Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Yeltsin.
   Preliminary election results gave Mr. Yeltsin an outright
victory with about 60% of the vote, defying some predictions
that a second round of balloting would be needed. His main
opponent, former Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov, came in a
poor second with between 15% and 20%. One of the biggest
surprises was the strong showing by Vladimir Zhirinovsky, who
finished third with about 7%.
   Mr. Zhirinovsky, almost unknown a month ago, campaigned
hard on a populist, anti-Communist platform. He easily
defeated the other three candidates, who included a hard-line
Communist general, a former interior minister close to Mr.
Gorbachev and a worker from the Siberian coal fields.
   Much of the campaign turned on the issue of how quickly
change should come to Russia, particularly economic reform.
With the exception of Messrs. Yeltsin and Zhirinovsky, all
other candidates warned against moving too fast to destroy
the decaying socialist system. Mr. Ryzhkov, in particular,
strongly opposed the introduction of private property and
said the government should move very gradually to sell off
any state assets.
   But the Russian public, tired of years of half-measures
that have merely reduced their already low living standards,
clearly rejected the idea of yet more caution. It remains to
be seen if Mr. Yeltsin can live up to his campaign promise
that the economy will start to turn around within a year or
two. As chairman of the Russian parliament since 1990, he has
introduced much new economic legislation. But it has had
little effect, largely because of a crippling deadlock
between Russia and Mr. Gorbachev's central authorities that
now appears to have ended.
   Mr. Yeltsin's aides say he is now likely to push for
radical economic measures, including large-scale
privatization, lower military spending and the introduction
of private farming. But opponents, and even some supporters,
say that even such moves may not fill the empty shelves of
stores as quickly as Mr. Yeltsin hopes.
   Mr. Ryzkhov's main support came from the military,
industry and the government bureaucracy. Despite their
considerable powers, they failed to persuade voters to back
their candidate. "Only the official structures of power
supported Ryzhkov," said sociologist Yuri Levada.
   A glaring example of the establishment's declining clout
came at the Lenin collective farm near the town of Vladimir.
Its managers were among the first to nominate Mr. Ryzhkov for
president. But in the voting, a majority of the 1,130 workers
ignored their bosses and opted for Mr. Yeltsin. The
unofficial Russian information agency said Mr. Ryzhkov was
backed by just 18% of the farm laborers; 51% voted for Mr.
Yeltsin. Further indicating the rout of the establishment,
two allies of Mr. Yeltsin, Mr. Popov and Anatoly Sobchak,
were easily elected mayors of Moscow and Leningrad
respectively.
   Mr. Yeltsin has said he will try to forge a broad
coalition for change, one that includes reform-minded members
of the Communist Party as well as more radical anti-Communist
democrats. On the campaign trail, he sought to present
himself as a responsible, presidential figure who could keep
his emotions in check. Seeking to build bridges to his former
adversaries, he even picked an air force colonel and
Communist Party member, Alexander Rutskoi, as his running
mate.
   As expected, he won strongest support from city dwellers
throughout the Russian republic. He captured 90% of the vote
in his hometown of Sverdlovsk and more than 70% in Moscow.
But the total was pushed down by rural dwellers, who are
traditionally more conservative. And the outcome was far less
of a landslide than the 89% support Mr. Yeltsin won in Moscow
in 1989, when he ran for the national parliament.
   Political analysts say his popularity appears to have
peaked since he gave up his stance as the rebel outsider
fighting the system and became chairman of the Russian
parliament. "He wasn't absolutely dominant," said Andrei
Zdravomyslov, president of the Soviet Sociologists
Association. Mr. Levada said some voters may have been irked
by the slow pace of practical change in Russia under Mr.
Yeltsin's leadership. "People are growing tired of waiting,"
the sociologist added.
   Mr. Yeltsin's more conciliatory stance has made it easier
for Mr. Gorbachev to distance himself from Communist
hardliners, who seemed to have the upper hand only six months
ago. Sergei Parkhomenko, a political analyst for the liberal
Independent newspaper, said he suspects Mr. Gorbachev
actually wanted Mr. Yeltsin to beat Mr. Ryzhkov, a comment
echoed by other analysts who hope that the U.S.S.R. is now on
the way toward more decisive reforms.
   Mr. Gorbachev was careful not to take sides during the
campaign, saying only that he was prepared to work with any
winner, including Mr. Yeltsin.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

