
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900806-0077 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-06-90 1340EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-Iraq-Kuwait 4thLd-Writethru a0553 08-06 1162</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Iraq-Kuwait, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0553,1197</SECOND>
<HEAD>Iraq Prepares for Attack; Turkish Oil Pipeline Closed</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto AMS2, BON1-2</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 2 grafs after 4th pvs, `Saudi Arabia...' to UPDATE
with reports carrier battle group within striking distance of gulf,
U.S. rapid deployment force dispatched. Pickup 5th pvs, `In
other...'</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By SALAH NASRAWI</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BAGHDAD, Iraq (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Ruling party members said today that the
government, fearing a U.S. air attack, was distributing automatic
weapons to tens of thousands of supporters and preparing to
evacuate the Iraqi capital.
   A boycott of Iraqi oil forced Baghdad today to close one of two
pipelines in Turkey that were pumping the bulk of Iraq's exported
oil, Turkish officials said.
   A British official said Iraqi troops rounded up American and
British visitors in Kuwait and taking them to Iraq. The Foreign
Office spokesman said most were passengers from a British Airways
flight stranded in Kuwait since the Iraqi invasion Thursday.
``There is no evidence that they are in any way in trouble,'' the
official said.
   Saudi Arabia was reported reinforcing its troops along the
Kuwaiti border following concerns Iraq may try to invade it.
   Pentagon sources said the USS Independence and its carrier
battle group are now on station in the Arabian Sea, a position that
would allow it to launch fighter planes into the Persian Gulf
region.
   Gulf-based diplomats said soldiers from the American rapid
deployment force, formed to react to crises in the Middle East, had
been dispatched to the area.
   In other developments:
   _The new Kuwait government installed by Iraq hinted it might
take hostages or seize property of nations that take punitive
measures against Iraq.
   _Iraqi President Saddam Hussein said the 100,000 soldiers who
invaded Kuwait began to pull back Sunday. President Bush said Iraq
was lying.
   _Oil prices jumped more than $3 a barrel on news Europe and
Japan were joining the embargo of Iraqi oil. Stocks slumped
worldwide.
   _Hospital officials said at least 300 Kuwaiti and Iraqi soldiers
were killed during the invasion. In London, Kuwaitis arriving on a
special plane said 700 Kuwaitis died.
   The embargo of Iraqi oil grew over the weekend to include Japan
and the European Community. Along with the United States, they
bought more than half Iraq's exported oil, with most of it pumped
through Turkey.
   An official of the state-run Turkish pipeline company BOTAS said
pumping stopped at one of the two Turkish pipelines at 5 p.m. Iraq
reduced flow in the second, wider, pipeline to 70 percent of
capacity, they said.
   There was no comment from Iraq.
   The two pipelines pump Iraqi crude from Kirkuk oil fields in
northern Iraq to a terminal at the northeastern tip of the
Mediterranean. They carry 70 million tons of crude annually,
providing the outlet for the major share of Iraqi exports.
   The BOTAS official said all the countries participating in the
embargo purchase their Iraqi crude from the Turkish outlet.
   Iraq also exports oil through a Saudi Arabian pipeline and via
tankers in the northern Persian Gulf.
   A Foreign Office spokesman said today as saying a total of 366
people had been assembled by Iraqi troops in Kuwait, mostly
passengers from a stranded British Airways flight. They were being
transported by bus to the Iraqi border.
   Baghdad did not give any reason for its action.
   Immediately after the invasion Thursday, 11 Americans were
rounded up by Iraqi troops. They turned up safe in Baghdad.
   The new Iraqi-installed foreign minister of Kuwait, Lt. Col.
Walid Sa'oud Mohammed Abdullah, warned against further sanctions in
a statement broadcast Sunday by Iraqi radio.
   ``Countries that resort to punitive measures against the
provisional free Kuwait government and fraternal Iraq should
remember that they have interests and nationals in Kuwait,'' he
said.
   Iraqi soldiers invaded Kuwait after complaining that its
violation of OPEC production quotas was driving down world crude
prices, lowering Iraqi oil revenues. Saddam also accused Kuwait of
stealing oil from a field that includes land both sides claim.
   The respected Middle East Economic Survey reported today that
Kuwait's oil export facilities had been shut down.
   It also said there was considerable doubt Saudi Arabia, with the
world's largest oil reserves, would be willing to make up the
potential world oil shortage. Kuwait and Iraq together account for
one-fifth of the 23.5 million barrels produced daily by the 13 OPEC
nations.
   Tensions remained high in the region; a U.S. official said in
Washington that Iraqi troops massed on the Kuwaiti-Saudi border
were apparently digging in. An American technician at a secret
Saudi Arabian base said the kingdom had sent 200 to 300 tanks
toward its border with Kuwait.
   Oil industry sources in Saudi Arabia reached by telephone from
Bahrain said Saudi troops were entering the region of Khafji, near
the border. Residents reached by telephone reported intense air
activity near the Saudi airport overnight.
   The Washington Post reported today that Egypt was mobilizing
some elements of its armed forces to assist Saudi Arabia in the
event of an invasion.
   U.S. officials said there was no indication Iraqi troops were
preparing to invade Saudi Arabia. But Bush sent Defense Secretary
Dick Cheney to the kingdom to confer with its leaders, and the
White House said Secretary of State James A. Baker would go this
week to Turkey.
   Saadi Mehdi Saleh, the Iraqi army commander, was quoted by the
Al-Iraq newspaper as saying tens of thousands of volunteers had
joined the army to defend what he called ``Iraq and the revolution
in Kuwait.''
   Americans, he was quoted as saying, ``should understand that the
people of the great leader Saddam Hussein cannot be frightened.''
   Local members of the ruling Baath party said preparations were
under way to evacuate all of Baghdad's 4 million people to camps
outside the city. They were being told that the U.S. Air Force
might attack or that Israel might attack with chemical or nuclear
weapons.
   The party members also said the party had distributed guns,
mainly AK-47 automatic rifles, to tens of thousands of people
around the country.
   State radio said Saddam had ordered the formation of 11 new
Iraqi army divisions, expected to generate 100,000 troops. The Arab
world's most formidible military force is already estimated at 1
million men.
   At a border checkpoint 30 miles south of the Iraqi port city of
Basra, dozens of tanks, armored personnel carriers and trucks
carrying hundreds of soldiers crossed back into Iraq on Sunday.
   But thousands of Iraqi soldiers remained behind in Kuwait,
controlling major government buildings, commerical centers and
ports.
   Diplomats in the region said a new Kuwaiti army fanned out
through Kuwait. The force comprises about 80,000 troops, mostly
Iraqis.
   The nine-member Kuwaiti military government, announced by Iraq
on Saturday, remained a mystery. No photographs of the named
leaders have been shown and 12 reporters brought to Kuwait by the
Ministry of Information could not locate any of them.
   Kuwaiti diplomats said they were all Iraqis, including a
son-in-law of Saddam, a charge official Iraqi media denied.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
