
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-8766</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CHLBKAEWFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920808
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  08 AUG 92 / The Barcelona Olympics: Marathon a 'sell-out to
commercialism' - Tomorrow's runners face daunting heat and a wicked finish,
just for TV ratings
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
TOMORROW evening, just before the Olympic closing ceremony, the last and one
of the most prestigious events of the Games will be held. It is also without
doubt the most gruelling. Run in high heat, high humidity, high pollution
levels and over an extraordinary course, the Barcelona Olympic men's
marathon will prove one of the most physically demanding ever run. There are
lots of figures to show why. It is estimated that when the race begins in
Mataro, a seaside town north of Barcelona, the temperature will be an
already-uncomfortable 25`C. Towards the marathon's end, however, radiant
heat thrown off by buildings could be subjecting the runners to a
temperature of up to 30`C. More debilitating still, relative humidity in
Barcelona in August rises as high as 80 per cent. With more than 10
kilometres still to go, most of the course is an upward run. The last 4.6km,
which take the runners 60m higher still to the Olympic stadium at the top of
the hill of Montjuic, has an average gradient of more than 4.5 per cent, and
includes some sections of 7 per cent, equivalent in skiing terms to a steep
'red' run. But we do not need figures to convince us of the extraordinary
difficulty of tomorrow's race. Last Saturday, in the Olympic stadium, I
watched the final moments and aftermath of the women's marathon, begun at
the same time of day and run in similar conditions. Never in any event
voluntarily entered into, sporting or otherwise, have I seen such signs of
physical and mental distress. The race was won by the Unified Team's
Valentina Yegorova in 2 hours 32 minutes, a time considerably slower than
that achieved by women on less demanding Olympic marathon courses in Los
Angeles and Seoul. After her nearest competitor, Japan's Yuko Arimori, came
in eight seconds later, they had the energy - between bouts of grimacing and
lowering their heads to their knees - to embrace each other and smile for
the cameras.
It was a different story in the 'mixed zone,' the area under the stadium
where athletes recover after their events. As runner after runner stumbled
and limped into the room - several were brought in senseless on stretchers -
the scene seemed to be populated by exhausted boat people rescued after
weeks of exposure and deprivation at sea.
As a photographer calmly shot off a roll of film a foot from her face,
Manuela Machado of Mexico and another runner stood vomiting violently into a
potted palm. Several competitors lay prone and gasping on the ground as
water was poured over them; others stood hunched over, grasping their
abdomens.
If anyone moved at all, it was with agonised faces and the slowest of
hobbles. These are not the sort of scenes likely to promote enthusiasm for
marathon running or for the ideals of Olympic competition.
Chris Brasher, organiser of the London marathon, was on hand to witness the
suffering, and was incensed. Male marathon runners will face the same kind
of problems with heat, humidity, and an over-demanding terrain, he said.
In his opinion, gearing the marathon to prime-time TV viewing and having the
event end at the top of a hill for the sake of stadium spectators was
unjustified and a 'sell-out to commercialism.
'To put on the marathon in the late afternoon, rather than first thing in
the morning (the normal practice), and then to make them run 4km up a hill
is just criminal in my opinion,' said Brasher, a former Olympic gold medal
athlete and noted sportswriter.
I spoke to Britain's Steve Brace, winner of the Paris marathon in 1989 and
1990, the Berlin marathon last year and a competitor in the Barcelona event.
He agrees that the run will be highly demanding, and while he regards
Olympic marathon running as a pinnacle of his career, he is cautious about
tomorrow's slog.
Like almost all the athletes running tomorrow, Brace is a professional
runner who specialises in marathons. He takes an objective, long-term view
of his profession. As an income-earner, marathon running is an activity with
liabilities and limitations, and requires business management as well as
physical ability.
The winner of the London marathon earns a tidy Dollars 50,000 and the New
York, Boston and Japanese runs are all in the same prize-winning category.
But these and less financially-rewarding events are physically debilitating,
and can only be won if a competitor is in top physical shape.
With their careers and financial prospects in mind, top-level runners
normally only run two marathons a year. As Brace says, when you have only
two pay-days out of 365, you choose, plan and train for them with great
care.
Brace trains extremely carefully indeed. 'Running a marathon is the easy
part,' he says. 'The hard part is the lead-up to achieving the performance
level required.' He starts training three months before an event by running
80 miles a week and then building progressively. For the last six weeks he
runs 120 miles a week.
Normally he would hope that such a routine brings a pay-off. But the Olympic
marathon is an exception: the only top-level marathon that carries no prize
money. Brace says that in spite of the prestige and possible financial
spin-offs involved, 'it does not necessarily make sense to run to win.'
Given the highly demanding nature of the course and their desire to preserve
physical condition for races that do bring in money, he says, many runners
will give less than their best effort.
Nonetheless, there are plenty whose considerations stretch beyond the purely
financial. Italian Gelindo Bordin, who came first in the 1988 Seoul Olympic
marathon, is a strong contender. So is Djibouti's Ahmed Salah, who came
third in Seoul. Ibrahim Hussein of Kenya and Hiromi Taniguchi of Japan are
also possible winners.
None of them, though, will make a molehill out of the steep and formidable
ascent of Montjuic.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page IX
</PAGE>
</DOC>
