
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870220-0106 </DOCNO>
<HL> Los Angeles Tries to Make Its Marathon
Both a Civil Festival and a Profit Center
---
By Frederick Rose
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 02/20/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN>
<DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A crowd the size of a small city will squeeze past a starting line here March 1 to run 26 miles, 385 yards. 
And cheering every step of that distance will be more than a dozen corporate sponsors and licensees. 

   Makers of cars, soda pop, sportswear, copiers, computers -- even a hospital -- have tagged their names to the Los Angeles Marathon. 
In the promoter's words, this run is "a marketing event on legs," reflecting marathoning's growing importance in upscale product promotions. 

   Runners, it seems, are a well-heeled lot. 
A study by Mercedes-Benz found that 42% of family heads making $40,000 a year or more jog regularly. 
Of potential buyers showing up at Mercedes dealers, 47% are joggers. 
With those numbers in mind, the car maker has become a sponsor of three marathons -- in New York, Boston and Los Angeles -- as well as other running races. 

   Marathons have had corporate backing for some time. 
But Los Angeles is ahead of the pack in making distance running a commercial spectacle. 
The city that invented the corporate-sponsored Olympics has created a marathon unlike others -- artfully dressed as an Olympic-type amateur race, but built from the ground up to make money for the closely held company that controls it -- as well as for the city. 
"I took air and made an event," says William Burke, the founder and president of Los Angeles Marathon Inc. 

   For a man whose running days ended with his high school track team, Mr. Burke is turning a lot of heads in the world of marathoning. 
Last year, its first time out, the Los Angeles race attracted nearly 11,000 runners -- four times the number forecast and enough to make it the third -- largest race in the U.S. 
The event also pulled in about $4 million in cash and services from its sponsors, leaving the organizers with $370,000 in red ink. 

   This year, Mr. Burke and his partner, Marie Patrick, expect to gross about $5 million in cash and services and to break even. 
Next year, they say, a profit is possible. 
More than 18,000 runners are expected this year. 
An audience of perhaps a million and a half or more will line the route, drawn in part by advertisements on 75 million Coca-Cola cans and 2,500 billboards around the Los Angeles area. 

   Marketing experts say the festive atmosphere of big crowds in the streets makes marathons attractive to sponsors. 
For the cost of a 30-second ad on the Super Bowl, a company can sponsor a marathon and "take over a city," says Lesa Ukman, editor of Special Events Reports, a Chicago-based newsletter. 

   The Los Angeles organizers and sponsors have perhaps done more than their counterparts elsewhere to publicize the event. 
Los Angelenos are seeing plugs for the race on millions of grocery bags, milk cartons and loaves of bread, in addition to soda cans, billboards and other sources. 

   The venerable New York Marathon is taking note. 
The New York Road Runners Club, organizer of the race, stopped promoting the event some years ago because it had all the runners it wanted. 
Now, Fred Lebow, the group's president, says he is encouraging sponsors to promote the race as the Los Angeles sponsors do. 

   The promotion in Los Angeles is unabashed. 
"We tell people that if they're looking for a new way to crack the Los Angeles market, this is it," says Mr. Burke. 
The pitch has attracted the likes of Coca-Cola Bottling Co. of Los Angeles; Vons Cos., a large supermarket chain; the Los Angeles Times; the Sears Savings Bank unit of Sears, Roebuck & Co.; Eastman Kodak Co., and Tandem Computers Inc. 

   One supporter is Ellesse USA, a sportswear and shoe producer. 
A $50,000 fee enables the company to use the marathon's name in its ads; Ellesse will spend an additional $100,000 dressing race personnel in T-shirts and warm-up suits, showing its clothes at the marathon's public "Expo" of sponsors' wares, and posting a dozen big street banners along the course. 

   The company has rented more than 500 billboards at a cut-rate price of $120,000 from Patrick Media Group, a marathon sponsor. 
The discount, about 50%, was important. 
"We couldn't have bought that kind of exposure normally," says Susan Cialone, Ellesse's advertising director. 

   Ellesse, which also sponsors the New York run, finds the West Coast event more freewheeling. 
"They have let us do whatever we want," says Ms. Cialone. 
For instance, product banners along the route -- almost impossible to arrange in New York -- are a snap in Los Angeles. 

   The city, in fact, is a partner in the race. 
After competitive bidding, it awarded an eight-year contract to Los Angeles Marathon Inc. to put on the race. 
The exclusive franchise calls for the race organizers this year to pay a minimum $60,000 fee or 4% of gross cash receipts to the city. 
The organizers also will pay the cost of city services for the marathon, estimated at $100,000. 

   The race sponsors and city officials are trading freely on the good will generated by Los Angeles's role as host of the 1984 Olympics. 
The logo of the marathon is a shield with laurel wreath. 
Some posters show the Los Angeles Coliseum with its torch and giant Olympic symbol. 
"The World Returns to Los Angeles," proclaims one Mercedes-Benz ad. 

   Race directors are called "commissioners," a term borrowed from the 1984 Olympic organization, in which Mr. Burke was commissioner of tennis. 
And like the Olympics, Los Angeles Marathon Inc., portraying the race as a civic celebration, thrives on volunteers. 
Some 7,500 people will work for free to monitor the course on race day. 
And two-thirds of the race's office staff work without pay. 
"I couldn't buy this," Mr. Burke says, gesturing around the crowded race headquarters. 

   Not everyone works for free. 
Big-name runners, for instance, want to be paid a lot. 
And here, the organizers have pinched pennies. 
While some runners will be paid to appear, this year's field, like last year's, lacks some of the superstars who race in Boston, New York and London. 

   Grete Waitz, one of the best woman marathoners, wanted $100,000 to appear in Los Angeles; she was turned down. 
Mr. Burke says the Australian runner Rob de Castella made it known through his agent that he wouldn't run any marathons in the spring but, for $25,000, he'd be happy to say the Los Angeles event was tempting. 
Mr. Burke says he slammed down the phone. 
"We won't spend extraordinary amounts of money on any single runner to the detriment of the other runners," he says. 
Mr. de Castella's agent denies the story entirely. 

   What Los Angeles lacks in superstars, it plans to make up for in numbers. 
This year's race may challenge New York and London as the largest marathon ever run. 
Some 20,500 started the New York race last year. 
Mr. Lebow, organizer of the New York event, says next year's Los Angeles Marathon will surpass that number. 

   For one sponsor, this may be a mixed blessing. 
Orthopaedic Hospital, a not-for-profit institution whose sponsorship is part of a publicity campaign, provides emergency care stations along the marathon route. 
Last year, one of every 20 runners needed aid. 
Along with sprains, strains and blisters came more serious cases of exhaustion and hypothermia. 
A spokeswoman says: "We advised 250 people to quit the race." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
