
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891116-0198 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-16-89 2218EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-SouthernTornadoes 3rdLd-Writethru a0813 11-16 1138</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Southern Tornadoes, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0813,1167</SECOND>
<HEAD>Huntsville Picks Up Pieces One Day After Killer Tornado</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Fixes paragraphing in 1st 2 grafs; SUBS 2nd graf to raise reference
to Illinois death; SUBS grafs 10-13, `The cafeteria ... Hughes said' with
6 grafs to UPDATE with up to 125 children in school, dead ages 7 to 8,
four injured critically, power outages in Connecticut; picks up 14th graf,
`Tornadoes were ...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos HUN1,2,3,5,10,13, MFD1, LaserColor HUN10</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By PAUL NEWBERRY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   A violent storm that spun tornadoes across the South and Midwest
blew north Thursday, knocking a cafeteria wall down on top of
lunching schoolchildren in upstate New York. The two-day toll was
at least 27 dead and hundreds injured.
   The cafeteria cave-in claimed the lives of seven children near
Newburgh, N.Y., and deaths also were reported in New York City, New
Jersey and Illinois. Seventeen people died Wednesday in Huntsville,
Ala., when a tornado packing 250 mph winds struck virtually without
warning, laying waste to a wide swath of the city.
   The storm churned around a collision of record warm air and
extremely cold air. The result was tornadoes and unusually severe
thunderstorms.
   By far the worst damage was in Huntsville, where an estimated
1,000 people were left homeless and National Guardsmen stood watch
against looting Thursday.
   No bodies were believed left in the rubble, but portions of the
city resembled a bombing target. A shopping center and clusters of
apartment buildings were leveled. Cars were piled atop each other.
Utility poles had been snapped like twigs.
   The National Weather Service said the tornado path had covered
between eight and 10 miles and that its wind speeds were as high as
250 mph.
   ``It's like taking six to 10 city blocks and putting them in a
blender and putting it on liquefy,'' said rescue worker Bob Caraway.
   As the storm moved north on Thursday, it knocked over trees and
ripped the the roofs off houses in West Virginia, injuring four
members of one family, two seriously. The storm also caused
flooding in Washington, D.C., blew the windows out of skyscrapers
in Philadelphia and destroyed a house in Piscataway, N.J.
   A truck driver died when his tractor-trailer overturned in high
winds on a bridge connecting Elizabeth, N.J., and New York City. A
New York City woman died after being hit by a steel beam blown off
a water tower.
   In Wyckoff, N.J., high winds knocked a power line onto a gas
line, sparking a fire that forced the evacuation of 20 homes,
according to police. No houses were burned.
   The cafeteria collapse occurred at the East Coldenham Elementary
School in Newburgh at about 12:30 p.m., when from 113 to 125
students in first, second and third grades were eating lunch, said
Newburgh police Chief John Kulisek.
   State Police and survivors said they believed the school was hit
by a tornado, but the National Weather Service said it could not
confirm that until investigators went to the scene.
   The center section of a cinder-block and glass wall fell in on
the cafeteria, showering the pupils with glass and concrete.
   ``You are talking about huge concrete blocks that fell on top of
the kids,'' state police Lt. Robert Hughes said.
   Seven children ages 7 and 8 were killed and 18 others were
injured, four critically, officials said.
   In eastern Connecticut, more than 75,000 Northeast Utilities
customers lost power in the afternoon, and 18,000 remained without
power at 9 p.m., spokeman Jeffery Kotkin said.
   Tornadoes were reported Wednesday in Mississippi, Alabama,
Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Kentucky, Ohio and
Indiana. A severe thunderstorm in Illinois claimed one life and
caused several million dollars in damage.
   Altogether, the storms were blamed for at least 27 deaths and
more than 500 injuries over the two days.
   In Alabama, Gov. Guy Hunt said he would ask President Bush to
declare Huntsville a disaster area to open the door to millions of
dollars in federal relief. Mayor Steve Hettinger said no firm
damage estimates were expected until Friday, but he put the number
of homeless at 1,000.
   Hunt assigned nearly 200 Guardsmen to assist in the cleanup and
help law officers guard against looting. Police spokeswoman Susan
Williamson said there had been minor looting the night of the storm
but no arrests.
   The temperature, which had risen to 73 before the storm
Wednesday, plunged into the 30s early Thursday while rescuers
worked through the night under the glare of floodlights.
   The lights, powered by generators, produced an eerie glow in a
area that was otherwise largely without power. Tall cranes lifted
the heavy rubble, while workers with flashlights picked through the
smaller pieces.
   As daybreak came, people began returning to the scene, some to
look for valuables in ravaged cars or businesses, others simply out
of curiosity. Many carried cameras or videocassette recorders.
   Police Maj. Robert Moder said there was no indication that
anyone was left in the rubble.
   ``We don't have any reports of people missing,'' he said
Thursday morning.
   Moder said 463 people were injured and more than 150 of those
required at least overnight hospital treatment. Authorities had
said 19 people were killed but later lowered the death toll by two.
   All but one of the victims, who ranged in age from 7 to 67, were
killed along Airport Boulevard, a busy thoroughfare that seemed to
be a guide for the tornado on its deadly march. The other victim
perished on the city's outskirts, authorities said.
   Most of the dead were in apartments and stores that were torn
into twisted wreckage, or in cars blown off the pavement.
   The tornado seemed to catch everyone by surprise.
   ``It was fast,'' said Lucy Lee Rusk, who moved to a Red Cross
shelter after her apartment was battered by debris. ``It was like
one big pop and that's when everything went.''
   The National Weather Service had issued a severe thunderstorm
warning at 3:54 p.m., but the tornado struck with no real warning,
said Brenda Page of the service's office. A tornado warning was
broadcast at 4:39 p.m., two minutes after the twister was sighted
on the ground at the old Huntsville airport.
   Ms. Page said radar showed a strong storm but not the conditions
usually visible during tornadoes.
   Danny Cooper, director of the Alabama Emergency Management
Agency, said three people were seriously injured in an earlier
tornado that hit a home in Clay County in eastern Alabama. He said
a tornado in northwestern Alabama's Lauderdale County destroyed
three homes.
   Alabama Power Co. reported Thursday that violent winds had
battered the switchyard of the Farley Nuclear Power Plant near
Dothan on Wednesday night, causing about three gallons of
concentrated PCBs to spill. A spokesman said no one was injured,
the nuclear plant was not affected and a cleanup of the
cancer-causing chemicals was under way.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
