
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910723-0081
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910723-0081.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Gates, Named to Lead U.S. Intelligence Efforts,
   Is Haunted by Pledges to the Senate 5 Years Ago
   ----
   By David Rogers
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/23/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A24
</SO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
AEROSPACE (ARO)
INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)
</IN>
<NS>
TRADE ISSUES (TRD)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)
IRAN (IR)
MIDDLE EAST (ML)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NICARAGUA (NU)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Robert Gates's hopes to lead the Central
Intelligence Agency are haunted not just by the Iran-Contra
scandal but also by his own promises five years ago, when the
late CIA Director William Casey chose the young analyst to be
his deputy.
   "Director Casey and I have discussed my forthcoming duties
. . . and intend to integrate our offices so that I will be
involved in all areas of decision making," Mr. Gates told
senators. Special attention would be paid to the CIA's
"relationship with the oversight committees, improving our
mechanism for decision making, particularly on large
investment items in a period of more constrained growth . . .
and continuing efforts to improve the linkage between
assessments and collection."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Those bureaucratic words have taken on new irony given
what is now known about what was happening at the time.
Instead of improved "oversight," documents were withheld from
Congress. "Decision making" often fell to international arms
dealers. "Investments" in U.S. weapon sales to Iran became
the means to sustain Nicaraguan guerrillas in a "period of
more constrained growth."
   In nominating Mr. Gates to head the CIA, President Bush --
himself a former head of the agency -- is seeking a man with
a reputation as an able briefer and analyst. But in the
process he has also reopened an old wound in Congress -- the
sense of betrayal lawmakers felt when the Iran-Contra affair
erupted.
   Mr. Gates says he was unaware of much of what was
happening, but his explanations contradict the forceful image
he projected as the incoming deputy. His predecessor, John
McMahon, would say later of the deputy's job: "If something
came up that I wasn't aware of, it was very easy to go find
someone who knew what was going on." In Iran-Contra, Mr.
Gates's defense is that he didn't ask.
   He long ago acknowledged that he and the agency had a
"major preoccupation" with the renewal of U.S. military aid
to the Contras in October 1986. But Mr. Gates admits to
little curiosity about how the forces had survived in the
interim. When told by then-White House aide Oliver North that
the CIA was "clean" in regard to the arms-supply network, Mr.
Gates wrote a memo to himself. Yet despite warnings days
before of a potential diversion of funds, he made no record
of Col. North's reference to Swiss bank accounts and the
Contras. "Since I didn't know what he was talking about," Mr.
Gates told Iran-Contra investigators in a 1987 deposition,
"there is no reason to include it."
   "All of us in our life, personal or professional, have a
moment where we don't want to know," says Langhorne Motley, a
former Reagan administration official. "The problem a civil
servant faces when he exercises that human instinct is, how
does that square with his job description? Where can Gates
and the rest of these guys draw the line? Where does the
public and press draw that line for them?"
   The same dilemma faces the CIA itself, which was both a
victim and silent partner in the Iran-Contra affair. The
White House substituted private agents for professionals to
carry out the operation, but the pros were still in the best
position to observe what was taking place.
   Mr. Casey's death made it easy to put the blame on him in
the Iran-Contra hearings four years ago, allowing the agency
to escape largely unscathed. When the investigating
committees finally turned to CIA witnesses, lawmakers were
sometimes met with disdain and evasiveness. And they
themselves were divided over how hard to press the agency.
When Iran-Contra lawyers sought to depose Mr. Gates in July
1987, Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman David Boren
vigorously protested. "He's one of the most candid people
we've ever dealt with," said the Oklahoma Democrat.
   Mr. Gates's candor will certainly become an issue now. Two
former CIA officers, Alan Fiers, former chief of the Central
America task force, and Clair George, Mr. Casey's deputy
director for operations, are likely to be called to testify.
Mr. Fiers has admitted in federal court to learning of the
diversion of funds to the Contras months before it became
public, and his statements cast doubt on Mr. George's denials
that he had no early knowledge of the White House operation.
   Once a rising star in the agency, Mr. Fiers was an ardent
ally of the Nicaraguan resistance and broke into tears at his
retirement party when he spoke of their cause. The office of
independent counsel Lawrence Walsh sees Mr. Fiers as its
first truly cooperative witness, and the former Central
America chief had contact with Mr. Gates, particularly after
Congress voted to resume military aid to the Contras.
   Mr. George is a more hardened infighter who spent
virtually his entire career in the CIA's operations division.
A decorated station chief abroad, he could play the
rollicking bon vivant at home with a flair for the dramatic
and an ability to chat up -- and frustrate -- interrogators.
His deposition before Iran-Contra attorneys in 1987 was
scarcely under way before he was greeting lawyers and House
staff by their first names. Of Mr. Fiers, he said then: "I
love him."
   Relations were more strained with Mr. Gates, but Mr.
George is an intriguing figure because of his position as a
direct subordinate to the deputy and also a CIA contact with
Col. North. In his deposition, Mr. George referred to Mr.
Gates as "my boss," but his answers also suggested that he
might have circumvented the deputy director's office in
circulating intelligence related to Col. North's operation.
Col. North, in turn, seems to have seen Mr. George as an
ally, and a fellow CIA operations officer testified that Col.
North was "very ill at ease" when unable to reach Mr. George
at a critical juncture.
   Mr. George's working relationship with Col. North
coincided with a deep distrust of some of the private
operatives used by the National Security Council. In talking
with Iran-Contra investigators, Mr. George mocked retired Air
Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord; and early in the Iran
initiative, he had allied himself with Mr. McMahon and Mr.
Gates to raise concern over Gen. Secord's past ties to
renegade CIA agent Edwin Wilson. Messrs. Gates and George
were also aware of Gen. Secord's role with the Contras, and
one question is how much information the wily Mr. George
shared with his superior in a behind-the-scenes bureaucratic
fight to block the CIA from buying a ship and other equipment
controlled by Gen. Secord and his partner, former CIA officer
Thomas Clines.
   Mr. Gates's friends and supporters warn that he at least
must show he has learned from the experience. Says Sen.
William Cohen of Maine, formerly the top Republican on the
Intelligence Committee: "He is going to have to establish
that he is going to do things differently than he did."
</TEXT>
</DOC>

