
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910912-0105
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910912-0105.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Counterpoint:
   Robert Gates, a Case Worth Investigating
   ----
   By Doug Bandow
</HL>
<DATE>
09/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A19
</SO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
AEROSPACE (ARO)
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)
</IN>
<NS>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
TRADE ISSUES (TRD)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)
IRAN (IR)
MIDDLE EAST (ML)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NICARAGUA (NU)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   The nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court is
dominating the news, but another important nomination with
constitutional overtones will come before the Senate on
Monday -- that of Robert Gates as CIA director. The Journal,
of course, has long dismissed the significance of the
Iran-Contra scandal to which Mr. Gates is linked. In flip
tones, this paper's editors have written: "We admit to not
knowing how much Mr. Gates knew, and especially to not
caring." Columnist Ken Adelman went even further in the
Washington Times, arguing that because Mr. Gates's connection
to Iran-Contra is trivial the Democratic opposition to him
must also be based on the idea that Mr. Gates "is less
risk-averse and more strongly identified with presidential
leadership" than some senators would like.
   But what Mr. Gates knew and should have known should
decide whether he is confirmed. Mr. Gates, who served as the
agency's deputy director under William Casey, says he was
unaware of the bizarre scheme orchestrated by Oliver North to
use the proceeds of the sale of weapons to Iran to fund
Nicaragua's Contras.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Perhaps Mr. Casey did cut him out of the illicit program.
Mr. Gates, however, admits that he had heard some rumors of
the North operation before it became public, but disregarded
what he termed the "flimsy" evidence. He also acknowledges
that Col. North once mentioned Swiss bank accounts and the
Contras, but Mr. Gates ignored the comment because "I didn't
know what he was talking about." Indeed, in 1987 Mr. Gates
admitted to congressional investigators that "we actively
discouraged people from telling us things."
   Even more disturbing is the fact that Mr. Gates was
sandwiched between several officials -- Casey; Clair George,
the deputy director for covert operations who was indicted
Friday; Jerry Gruner, chief of the agency's Latin American
division; and Alan Fiers, head of CIA operations in Central
America -- who were running the extraconstitutional Contra
project. Although that doesn't mean Mr. Gates necessarily
knew about the secret aid, it does require that his claim be
carefully scrutinized.
   Mr. Gates's story has become slightly less believable with
the recent revelation that, contrary to his original
assertion, he in fact met several times with Mr. Fiers in
1986 and served as interagency coordinator of the limited,
legal assistance program for the Contras. That aid,
emphasizes the administration, was approved by Congress. But
Mr. Gates's involvement in the Nicaraguan issue and his
meetings with a subordinate who knew about Col. North's
operation add power to the argument that he either knew or
should have known about Iran-Contra.
   Computer messages moreover indicate that Mr. Gates talked
with National Security Council Director John Poindexter, an
active participant in the scheme, about a proposal to lease a
cargo ship to transfer arms to the Contras and the
possibility of the agency purchasing the entire resupply
system for the Contras if Congress approved more aid.
Finally, there is a reference in Col. North's office diary
that suggests he discussed his activities at a lunch with the
CIA director and Mr. Gates, though the latter says Col. North
assured him the CIA was not involved.
   The many supporters of Mr. Gates who don't believe he knew
about Col. North's operation may be right. But certainly
there is enough evidence to warrant investigating the charge
-- unless one doesn't believe involvement in Iran-Contra
should bar a person from heading the CIA. In Patrick
Buchanan's view, for instance, Congress was guilty of a
"criminal betrayal" in cutting off money to the Contras,
while "the CIA men who discovered Ollie's diversion and did
not report it, were loyal to a cause that was just." If they
dissembled, it was "perhaps because they came to believe
Congress was on the other side."
   That Congress leaves much to be desired goes without
saying. But the relative courage of Col. North and the
average legislator does not change the fact that the
diversion scheme was a direct assault on our system of
constitutional liberty. A small group of men apparently
bypassed the president, lied to Congress, and used part of
the proceeds of the sale of weapons paid for by taxpayers to
implement their own private foreign policy. That these people
may have been well-meaning doesn't matter: the Constitution
places the power of the purse in Congress, not with a handful
of executive appointees. It is for the voters, not the CIA
director and a Marines Corps detailee to the NSC, to decide
that Congress is "on the other side."
   And there's a reason for that. The American government was
not intended to be dominated by the executive. Instead, the
Founders hoped to protect individual liberty by creating a
system that dispersed power to different levels and branches
of government. The drafters even chopped the authority to
conduct foreign affairs into several different powers and
gave many of them -- most important, the authority to raise
armies, declare war and approve treaties, as well as the
power to appropriate money -- to Congress.
   For years it was conservatives who fought to prevent the
consolidation of power in the federal government and the
executive branch. Yet the failure of Republicans to win
control of the House in nearly four decades has increasingly
led many of them to long for American-style Gaullism.
   Last fall numerous conservatives backed George Bush's
claim that he could unilaterally transfer one-fourth of the
U.S. military thousands of miles from home and launch a
full-scale war on another sovereign state. The Journal has
championed the idea that the president has an inherent
line-item veto power. Some analysts now argue that the
Constitution prevents Congress from limiting the activities
that appropriated funds may be used for and allows the
president to fire the heads of independent agencies. In
short, today many conservatives want their presidents to be
like the liberal activists of yore: Woodrow Wilson, Franklin
Delano Roosevelt, Harry Truman and Lyndon Johnson, who all
expanded executive power.
   But there were good reasons why conservatives were the
sharpest critics of these "strong" presidents -- that "Mr.
Republican" Robert Taft, for instance, argued that Truman did
not have the constitutional authority to take the country
into war in Korea. These conservatives' concerns over
concentrated executive power remain equally valid today.
Indeed, Taft, along with any number of believers in limited
government, would have been dismayed at the argument that
someone should be confirmed as CIA director even though he
aided or ignored a scheme that improperly circumvented
Congress.
   What did Robert Gates know and what should he have known?
Congress has a duty to find out. If it turns out that Mr.
Gates was involved in, or consciously ignored, the
Iran-Contra operation, his nomination should be rejected by
conservatives and liberals alike. Our system of
constitutional liberty is too important to sacrifice for
temporary partisan gain. On the Gates question, the Journal
wonders, "Don't these people have anything better to ask
about?" The answer is no.
   ---
   Mr. Bandow is a fellow at the Cato Institute and served as
a special assistant to President Reagan.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

