
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911004-0092
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911004-0092.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Gates Denies Charges He Distorted
   Data to Suit White House Policy
   ---
   Nominee for Top CIA Post
   Angrily Rebuts Critics
   Who Hurt Candidacy
   ----
   By David Rogers
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/04/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Robert Gates, shedding the aloofness that
has been his trademark, delivered an angry rebuttal of
charges that he distorted analysis in the Central
Intelligence Agency to win favor with superiors and suit the
policies of the Reagan administration.
   Appearing before the Senate Intelligence Committee, Mr.
Gates spoke in a voice quavering with emotion as he sought to
defend his integrity against adverse testimony by former
colleagues that has threatened his candidacy to lead the CIA.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "I never distorted intelligence to support policy or to
please a policy maker," said Mr. Gates, using words such as
"pernicious" and "reckless" to describe the allegations
against him. "It is a period when we got a lot right. We got
some important things wrong, but people were basically
calling them as they saw them."
   Republicans applauded the force of Mr. Gates's
presentation, but the former CIA deputy still faces doubts
among the moderate and conservative Democrats who are most
important to him in the committee and full Senate.
   Sen. John Glenn (D., Ohio), who had been silent
previously, weighed in yesterday with questions challenging
the CIA's independence in evaluating Pakistan's nuclear
weapons program in the 1980s. And Chairman David Boren's (D.,
Okla.) cross-examination of the nominee reflected continued
concern about Mr. Gates's role in the Iran-Contra affair and
his handling of a politically sensitive intelligence
assessment in 1985 on the Soviet role in the attempted
assassination of Pope John Paul II.
   The attack on the Pope was a preoccupation for former CIA
Director William Casey, and though Mr. Gates said he had no
fixed opinion on Moscow's complicity, the 1985 paper was
structured to make the case for the plausibility of Soviet
involvement. Written in a matter of weeks, the analysis was
distributed to cabinet secretaries and the White House, but
was sharply criticized months later by an internal CIA study
that found the work "spotty" and lacking balance.
   The episode is embarrassing for Mr. Gates because he had
been the conduit for circulating the paper to high officials,
and his letter to then-Vice President Bush described the
analysis as "comprehensive" and enabling the agency to
"present our findings with some confidence."
   In retrospect, the nominee conceded yesterday that the
cover letter should have better reflected the limitations of
the work. But he acknowledged too that he had never alerted
Mr. Bush or other high policy makers about the later,
internal CIA critique.
   Mr. Glenn's questioning regarding Pakistan touched on Mr.
Gates's active role within the agency on behalf of military
aid to Afghan resistance groups fighting the Soviet-backed
regime in Kabul. This covert program was carried out in close
alliance with Pakistan through the 1980s, and the senator
indicated that the CIA inspector general's office was
investigating if intelligence had been skewed in the same
period so as not to disrupt relations over the nuclear
weapons issue.
   Mr. Gates said he remembered no instance in which the CIA
had been pressured to "tone down" intelligence related to the
Pakistan weapons program, but his answers suggest that there
may have been an effort to work around the legal wording of
restrictions affecting assistance to the Islamabad
government. Aid to Pakistan is subject to an annual
certification by the president that the government doesn't
have a nuclear weapon. In this connection, Mr. Gates
described a "caution" from the Reagan administration for the
CIA "to be very careful about the words that were used
describing the situation."
   More often, "caution" was hardly the watchword for Mr.
Gates, who cut a swath through the agency as he rose under
the guidance of the late Director Casey. "You did too good a
job for Bill Casey," said Sen. Ernest Hollings (D., S.C.),
who has swung against the nominee since the hearings began
last month, and Mr. Gates admitted that he must address the
perception of politicization at the agency if confirmed as
director.
   Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn (D.,
Ga.), who is slated to question the nominee this morning,
indicated last night that he remains troubled by the
testimony against Mr. Gates. More broadly, the hearings could
force lawmakers to reassess their own responsibility to keep
closer tabs on intelligence analysis.
   Senate and House oversight committees have historically
paid more heed to budget issues and covert operations, yet
the hearings have suggested that ideological differences had
a far-reaching impact on what policy makers were told of the
Soviet threat to the U.S. and role in the Third World.
   Mr. Gates faulted the CIA for being "flabby" in assessing
Moscow's intentions in developing countries in the 1970s, and
his critics argue with equal ferocity that the Casey era
brought on a hard anti-Soviet line that led the U.S. to
ignore evidence of a Soviet retreat in the 1980s. Thousands
of papers and intelligence estimates were produced in Mr.
Gates's tenure in the top management, and he seems to have
been torn between his intellectual, analytical background and
his political ambitions to rise in the bureaucracy.
   With obvious pride yesterday, he cited an October 1986
memo arguing for more sensitivity to changes in Soviet
society; days later, he delivered a still controversial
speech to advance the Reagan administration's Strategic
Defense Initiative. Similarly, Mr. Gates was a stern
taskmaster in insisting on more factual evidence to support a
critique of the Afghan resistance forces. Yet he frustrated
his own Soviet analysts at another juncture when they felt a
paper actively promoted by Mr. Casey was without sufficient
evidence to back up back up a central premise in favor of
selected arms sales to Iran.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

