
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910716-0009
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910716-0009.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Nomination of Robert Gates for Top CIA Post
   Is Turning Into a High-Stakes Gamble for Bush
   ----
   By Walter S. Mossberg and Gerald F. Seib
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/16/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
</GV>
<RE>
AFRICA (AF)
CHILE (CI)
IRAN (IR)
IRAQ (IZ)
MIDDLE EAST (ML)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
SOUTH AFRICA (SF)
SOUTH AMERICA (SM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- President Bush's nomination of Robert Gates
to head the Central Intelligence Agency, which appeared at
first to be a low-risk political gamble, is turning into a
high-stakes roll of the dice for the White House.
   It is suddenly certain that Senate consideration of Mr.
Gates will drag on for weeks or months, and will feature an
extensive review of the Iran-Contra scandal and other
clandestine activities involving the CIA during the Reagan
administration, when Mr. Gates served in high CIA posts and
Mr. Bush was vice president.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   And President Bush, who initially expected his nominee to
be approved with a minimum of fuss, may have to use a lot of
political capital in the battle over the nomination, even
allies seem to acknowledge.
   "We have an obligation to get as much information as
possible," Alaska Sen. Frank Murkowski, a Gates backer and
the ranking Republican on the Senate Intelligence Committee,
said in an interview yesterday. "It's doubtful we can finish
till October," when the special prosecutor investigating the
Iran-Contra scandal is likely to conclude his inquiry.
   Even Oklahoma Democrat David Boren, the committee
chairman, who is a big Gates backer and supporter of the CIA,
has been privately unnerved by the new situation.
   "Another page of Iran-Contra is turning, and with every
page you have a chance to solve another piece of the puzzle,"
says New Jersey Democratic Sen. Bill Bradley, a leading Gates
critic on the committee.
   The rapid change in prognosis is almost entirely the
result of last week's guilty plea by former CIA official Alan
Fiers, who conceded that he knew about the central feature of
Iran-Contra: the diversion of funds from Iranian arms sales
to the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
   Mr. Gates has said he didn't know about the diversion, and
Mr. Fiers hasn't directly contradicted him. But he has said
he told Clair George, who headed covert operations at the CIA
and was just one step below Mr. Gates, then deputy director
of the agency.
   Before it votes on Mr. Gates, the panel is trying to
arrange to question Messrs. Fiers and George under oath to
find out what they know about Mr. Gates's knowledge of
Iran-Contra. But Mr. Fiers is refusing to appear unless he is
granted immunity from further prosecution. Congressional
sources say Mr. George, who appears to be under investigation
by the prosecutor, is also refusing to talk unless he gets
immunity. Sen. Murkowski said yesterday he doubts either man
can be heard from until the prosecutor is finished with them
in the fall.
   When Mr. Bush chose Mr. Gates for the post, he was betting
that the controversy over the Iran-Contra scandal, which
forced Mr. Gates to withdraw his 1987 nomination for the same
job, had died down. And the White House hoped that Mr.
Gates's performance since 1989 as deputy national security
adviser had won enough friends in Congress to bolster
confidence in his integrity.
   Mr. Gates still has strong supporters on the committee. "I
don't think opinion has shifted on the committee because of
the new developments," Sen. Boren says. Among many committee
members, Mr. Gates benefits from a widespread sense that he
is a good bureaucratic operator who won't be afraid to order
significant changes in the way the U.S. intelligence
committee does business in the changed world of the 1990s.
   While Sen. Bradley and a fellow Democrat, Howard
Metzenbaum of Ohio, have been vociferous critics of Mr.
Gates, some other committee Democrats, such as Arizona Sen.
Dennis DeConcini and South Carolina Sen. Ernest Hollings,
might be more willing to side with President Bush and his
choice. And there are few obvious defectors among the
15-member committee's seven Republicans.
   There are also some influential outside voices defending
Mr. Gates's integrity. Retired Adm. Bobby Inman, who like Mr.
Gates served for a time as deputy CIA chief to William Casey,
says Mr. Casey enforced a system where the covert-operations
staff reported directly to the director, and around the
deputy. "That's why I accept Bob Gates's direct assurances to
me that he wasn't involved," he says.
   Mr. Gates isn't returning reporters' phone calls, but Sen.
Murkowski, who spoke to him yesterday, says the nominee "is
ready to go" with the hearings, and isn't considering
withdrawing his name from consideration.
   Ideally, the White House would like the committee to vote
before Congress starts its summer recess Aug. 5. But that
isn't in the cards. Instead, the committee is weighing two
options, neither of them pleasant for the White House: either
waiting until fall to begin the hearings, or starting them
soon to allow Mr. Gates to testify -- then recessing until
the fall when it may know more about what the prosecutor is
turning up.
   The committee is planning to meet today to discuss which
of those options it will choose. "It's pretty much up to the
White House," says Sen. Murkowski, who says he thinks the
White House favors an early start no matter when the hearings
would end. Either way, Mr. Gates would be left hanging for
weeks, while rumors swirl of his involvement in various
covert operations.
   The process could be speeded if the panel votes to grant
Messrs. Fiers and George immunity from prosecution. Committee
sources say that's a possibility in the case of Mr. Fiers,
who has already pleaded guilty to misleading Congress. But
the committee would probably be reluctant to vote immunity
for Mr. George, who hasn't been charged with any crimes. And
Mr. George, a bureaucratic foe of Mr. Gates's, might be a
more important witness.
   Sens. Boren and Murkowski insist that the panel's role
isn't to broadly investigate either Iran-Contra or the CIA,
just to focus narrowly on Mr. Gates's personal activities.
But a number of other issues seem likely to slow and
complicate the Gates hearings, committee officials say.
   One is the recently disclosed existence of a CIA taping
system for recording calls between agency officials and their
field officers. The system wasn't illegal, but its scope
wasn't fully appreciated in Congress, even during the
Iran-Contra probe. The committee may want to know if Mr.
Gates was involved in hiding the existence of such tapes, or
if the tapes contain new information on his activities during
the Iran-Contra operations.
   A second issue concerns reports that the CIA played some
role in the unfolding financial scandal involving BCCI
Holdings (Luxembourg) S.A. And a third matter involves
allegations, including some aired by ABC News and published
in the Financial Times, that the CIA tolerated or even
assisted Iraqi efforts to smuggle out U.S. weapons technology
during the Iran-Iraq War through Chile and South Africa. ABC
asserts, and the White House denies, that Mr. Gates met with
a Chilean arms dealer to discuss the effort. The CIA
yesterday denied it ever provided military aid to Iraq.
   Like the taping system, the alleged Iraqi weapons-supply
operation wouldn't necessarily have been illegal; unlike
Iran, Iraq wasn't then banned as a weapons recipient, and
U.S. policy at the time favored helping Iraq to win the war.
But Congress might want to know why it wasn't informed of a
major effort to arm Iraq.
   To further complicate the hearings, Mr. Gates has made
enemies at the CIA in his years in the government, and some
of them have secretly gone to the intelligence committee with
their complaints. There always has been a cultural divide and
antagonism at the agency between analysts -- Mr. Gates's
background -- and covert operators. Operations officers
"don't have anything specific against" Mr. Gates but are
leery because he comes from the other side of the CIA house,
says Kenneth deGraffenreid, who oversaw intelligence programs
as a National Security Council officer in the Reagan
administration. In particular, Mr. Gates pushed for
bureaucratic changes that compelled operations officers to
work together with analysts on new task forces looking at
such issues as terrorism and drugs.
   Supporters say Mr. Gates also has ruffled some
bureaucratic feathers over the years among his analyst
colleagues by pushing them to make their work less academic
and more closely attuned to questions posed by policy makers.
Views of him are "split along the lines of people who think
that he's innovative vs. people who are more comfortable with
the traditional ways of doing business," says Roy Godson,
head of the Consortium for the Study of Intelligence.
   ---
   David Rogers contributed to this article.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

