
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910717-0134
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910717-0134.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Senate Panel
   Delays Action
   On CIA Post
   ---
   Gates Nomination Will Get
   Hearings in September;
   Ex-Aides Might Testify
   ----
   By David Rogers
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)
IRAN (IR)
MIDDLE EAST (ML)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NICARAGUA (NU)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Senate hearings on the nomination of Robert
Gates to be director of the Central Intelligence Agency were
postponed until September, as lawmakers voted to seek
testimony in the interim from former CIA officials regarding
the Iran-Contra scandal.
   Chairman David Boren of the Senate Intelligence Committee
said the panel would pursue a grant of immunity for Alan
Fiers, who oversaw the agency's Central American operations
in the mid-1980s and who last week pleaded guilty to charges
of withholding information from Congress.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In addition, a subpoena was authorized for Clair George,
the CIA's former deputy director for operations, but no
decision is expected to be made on immunity for him until
Iran-Contra independent counsel Lawrence Walsh has completed
whatever case he is making against Mr. George, who was Mr.
Fiers's superior.
   The decision to postpone the hearings, now scheduled to
begin Sept. 16, follows behind-the-scenes discussions between
committee leaders and the Bush administration, which last
night concurred with the decision. "A start-and-stop hearing
and confirmation process dragging out over a number of weeks
would not be fair to Mr. Gates," said White House spokesman
Marlin Fitzwater.
   The statement reflects a calculated retreat after demands
by President Bush for quick action, and administration
officials said the committee spurned a White House request to
free Mr. Gates to speak out publicly to defend himself
against any future charges that might arise during a break in
the hearings. Traditionally, congressional committees require
nominees to maintain a public silence outside the committee
room on issues pertaining to their confirmation until the
process is complete.
   Mr. Gates met privately late Monday with Sen. Boren, an
Oklahoma Democrat, and Sen. Frank Murkowski of Alaska, the
ranking Republican on the panel. As a practical matter, the
White House needs time itself to regroup and prepare its case
for the nomination.
   Mr. Fiers's recent guilty pleas have provoked renewed
interest in the role played by CIA officials -- including Mr.
Gates -- in the sales of arms to Iran and the use of profits
to supply Nicaraguan guerrillas. Mr. Gates served then as
deputy to William Casey, the late CIA director and a central
figure in the scandal. Mr. Fiers's court statements indicate
that people in the agency's operations division had knowledge
as well of both the diversion of funds and supply operation.
   Mr. George is among those implicated in Mr. Fiers's
pleadings, and a central issue is whether Mr. Gates failed as
deputy director to oversee what was happening in the agency.
Mr. Gates has repeatedly denied knowledge of the diversion,
but evidence collected by House and Senate IranContra
Committees in 1987 indicates that he received early warnings
from those under him in the summer and fall of 1986.
   As significant, there is interest in a White House staff
memo describing the agenda for a May 1986 meeting between the
then-national security adviser, Adm. John Poindexter, and
Messrs. Casey and Gates regarding a proposal for the CIA to
lease a ship controlled by the secret arms-supply network.
The vessel, a small coastal freighter, had been purchased for
$312,000 in April with funds generated partly by the sale of
arms to Iran. Adm. Poindexter's aide, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver
North, was seeking to lease it to the CIA for $1.2 million
for six months.
   The memo makes clear that the freighter -- dubbed "Ollie's
ship" -- was already known to CIA officials and Mr. Casey was
coming to the meeting with Mr. Gates with a briefing paper
prepared by the CIA on the proposed lease. Though there is no
evidence Mr. Gates knew then of how the ship was financed,
the prospect of such a large asset's being put forward by
Col. North's network indicated the size of the operation
being run from the White House.
   Among those opposing the proposed lease arrangement --
which was ultimately squelched -- was Mr. George, who served
under Mr. Gates but often reported directly to Mr. Casey. The
former operations director deeply distrusted some of the
private operatives used in Col. North's network, and his own
testimony to Iran-Contra investigators is revealing of the
tension facing CIA officials at the time. At one level,
officers sought to shield themselves from knowledge of the
operation, but at the same time there was professional
concern that the administration was relying on people who had
been associated with the renegade former CIA agent, Edwin
Wilson.
   Apart from Mr. George, the committee also authorized a
subpoena for the testimony of a senior CIA official
identified by Mr. Boren as Jerry Gruner. Mr. Gruner,
currently serving overseas, is one of two CIA officials, as
well as Mr. George, cited in a government statement
describing those who Mr. Fiers said knew about the diversion
before it became public.
   The statement, issued in connection with Mr. Fiers's
guilty plea, doesn't specifically name Mr. Gruner and
describes him only as Mr. Fiers's superior and chief of the
CIA's Latin American division. The statement says Mr. Fiers
told the CIA superior about the diversion in the summer of
1986 and the official instructed him to report the
information to Mr. George.
   William Hundley, a Washington lawyer who represents Mr.
Gruner, disputed the government's account and said his client
didn't learn of the diversion from Mr. Fiers until "the whole
matter started to unravel" in the fall of 1986. Mr. Hundley
said that if Mr. Gruner were subpoenaed by the Intelligence
Committee, "I would ask the committee to defer until his
status with the independent counsel is a little clearer."
   ---
   Edward T. Pound and Walter S. Mossberg contributed to this
article.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

