
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911224-0095
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911224-0095.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Frozen Frontier:
   Slowly, the Antarctic
   Gives Up Some Clues
   To Earth's Mysteries
   ---
   Battling the Cold, Researchers
   Find New View of Galaxy
   -- And Antifreeze in Fish
   ---
   Are the Sea Levels Rising?
   ----
   By Bob Davis
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/24/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   DNAP
</CO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
BIOTECHNOLOGY (BTC)
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
MEDICAL &amp; BIOTECHNOLOGY, GENETIC RESEARCH, PROSTHETICS (MTC)
</IN>
<NS>
ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)
</NS>
<RE>
CANADA (CN)
NEW JERSEY (NJ)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   MCMURDO SOUND, Antarctica -- Ward Testa is hunting for
seals.
   He picks his way carefully through cracked ice where
others have fallen to their death. Ahead is his quarry -- 20
female Weddell seals and their furry gray pups. Seeing him
approach, big stick in hand, they groan and try to scoot
away.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   There is no escape. Fortunately for the furry creatures,
Dr. Testa is interested in seal science, not seal skins.
Today he's after urine samples, using a metal tube attached
to a stick. Soon he plans to bar-code the animals,
supermarket-style, with plastic tags on their flippers.
   Dr. Testa, a bearded University of Alaska biologist, is
trying to learn why so many Antarctic seals starve every few
years. Maybe El Nino, an Equatorial storm system, alters
Antarctic currents, he muses, carrying the silverfish that
the seals feast on out of reach. "There's no mechanism that
can account for this," he says.
   What drives Dr. Testa and hundreds of other researchers to
Antarctica each year is the hope of discovering a hidden
truth about the planet. It's a unique laboratory.
   Antarctic science is science of the extremes. A continent
bigger than America, covered in ice more than a mile thick,
Antarctica is isolated by winds and currents that make it the
coldest, driest place on Earth. It is where scientists
discovered the ozone hole over the Earth in 1985, and where
they now hunt for clues to everything from global warming to
cosmic rays.
   This is the story of three groups of scientific sleuths in
Antarctica: biologists studying the antifreeze systems of
fish; glaciologists examining whether the West Antarctic ice
sheet will break apart and flood the world; and cosmologists
searching for the birth of galaxies.
                                                                                                       

   A Fish Story
                                                                                                       

   If it's so cold in Antarctica, why don't the fish freeze?
   Arthur DeVries has wondered why since his first visit here
in 1961. Seawater under the Ross Ice Shelf ranges from 28
degrees to 29.5 degrees -- cold enough to freeze most fish as
hard as Mrs. Pauls's. (The water doesn't freeze at 32 degrees
because salt and pressure lowers its freezing point.) The
fish he hooked beneath the ice swam contentedly in tanks
filled with frigid water, but died when the water was warmed.
He had found his life's work.
   Over the next seven years the biologist returned
repeatedly to Antarctica. He experimented with a family of
ugly gray and brown fish, called "notothenioidei," that
thrive in the waters here. After dissecting hundreds of them
and analyzing their blood, he learned they produce an
antifreeze molecule that lowers their freezing point just
enough to survive. "They live at the edge of freezing," he
says.
   Now 52, with a graying walrus mustache and walrus girth,
Dr. DeVries is one of the last of the old Antarctic hands
still conducting research "on the ice," as the place is
called here.
   Dr. DeVries became a pioneer in cryobiology -- the study
of the effects of extremely low temperatures on living
things. He and his colleagues found a half-dozen different
fish that produce antifreeze. A former grad student, Jack
Duman of Notre Dame, found antifreeze proteins in Midwestern
beetles, spiders and dandelions. Cryobiologists dream of
using antifreeze to preserve hearts for transplants, or
making freeze-resistant orange groves.
   Among the results of Dr. DeVries's yearly three-month
stints here are two divorces. His third wife, biologist Chris
Cheng, collaborates with him at their base at the University
of Illinois, trying to isolate the fish gene that makes
antifreeze proteins.
   Dr. DeVries calculates that fish antifreeze is 200 times
more effective than an equal amount of Prestone, but he can't
figure out why. Somehow, the antifreeze binds to tiny ice
crystals that the fish swallow as they swim.
   One sunny afternoon in November, Dr. DeVries and Joseph
Eastman, a longtime associate who teaches at Miami University
in Ohio, fish through a hole in the ice. That night, they
dissect a few dozen small "notothenioidei" and place their
organs in test tubes filled with seawater. They want to see
if ice collects in fish organs, and if it does, how the
organs and antifreeze keep the ice in check.
   The next afternoon at McMurdo's aquarium, a blue metal
shack with six big holding tanks, Dr. DeVries takes a small
fish and puts it in a bath chilled to 19 degrees -- well
below the temperature fish antifreeze works at. The fish
convulses, then stiffens, its eyes turn gray with ice. The
ice inside the fish had grown explosively at the lower
temperature, Dr. DeVries explains, wrecking the fish's
nervous system and cells.
   He repeats the test with each fish organ. The heart, "No
ice," he tells a young scientist taking notes. "Liver, no
ice. Ovaries, no ice. Blood, no ice." Finally, he dips a test
tube with a red spleen into the bath. It quickly becomes
encased in ice. The ice collector is found.
   But so is a new mystery. Ice buildup should overload the
spleen and kill the fish, he says, but it doesn't. He
speculates there may be a kind of "hot spot" in the fish,
that melts ice crystals. "There's still so much to do," he
sighs.
   Meanwhile, Canadian scientists are trying to breed salmon
with antifreeze genes so the fish can flourish in the icy
waters off Nova Scotia. DNA Plant Technology Corp. in
Cinnaminson, N.J., is testing tomatoes implanted with
antifreeze genes to see if they better withstand freezing and
thawing. General Foods has experimented with fish antifreeze
to see if it can prevent ice crystals from ruining ice cream
that's left out of the freezer and put back melted.
   But none of the research has panned out yet, and Dr.
DeVries is deeply skeptical it will until scientists
understand better how fish and their antifreeze work.
                                                                                                       

   The Great Flood Watch
                                                                                                       

   Robert Bindschadler sits in his dorm room at McMurdo -- a
place with the charm of a trailer park. He's staring at
satellite photos that may foretell the fate of hundreds of
millions of people.
   The photos don't look dramatic. Just a field of ice marked
by ripples and bumps, revealing crevasses and shifting ice.
The markings also show the immense forces of nature shaping
Antarctica.
   Four groups of glaciologists are setting up camp in West
Antarctica to see whether the ice sheet there -- a hunk of
ice as big as Greenland -- is beginning to collapse. If so,
sea level would rise so quickly that, within decades, some
coastal areas would lose 10 feet of shoreline a year. "Then,
it's curtains for Bangladesh," says Ohio State glaciologist,
Ian Whillans.
   Dr. Bindschadler, a National Aeronautics and Space
Administration glaciologist, points to tracks on his photos
that mark the mouth of two huge streams, 30 miles wide, of
solid ice. He plans to drive stakes into the ice along a
90-mile line just below the mouth, and come back two years
later to see how far the stakes have moved. Some ice streams
move a half mile a year, pulling ice from Antarctica's
interior to the sea. There it breaks into icebergs.
   By comparing the outflow of ice with measurements of snow
accumulation in the interior, scientists can calculate
whether the ice sheet is shedding ice. If so, they warn, a
cataclysmic cycle may be underway. The thinner the ice sheet
gets, the faster the ice streams will flow. And the faster
the ice streams flow, the thinner the ice sheet gets, until,
eventually, it collapses. Then, "prepare for the worst," says
Dr. Bindschadler.
   Just 20 years ago, the threat of a great flood from a
melting Antarctica was the stuff of supermarket tabloids. But
after experiments on two ice streams in the mid-1980s, even
former skeptics began taking the threat seriously. Scientists
found that the streams changed speed and direction rapidly --
showing the ice sheet as far more unpredictable than
imagined. And they found 500,000-year-old marine fossils
under the ice, indicating the ice sheet had melted before
when the Earth had warmed.
   If the ice sheet is melting, humans probably aren't to
blame. Glaciologists say Antarctica is responding to the
long-term warming of the Earth since the last ice age 18,000
years ago, and to the weird geology of the frozen continent.
   For the most part, the half-mile thick ice sheets slide
along a layer of mud. But occasionally the ice stream rolls
over a patch of dry rock -- a "sticky spot," says the
University of Wisconsin's Charles Bentley. That stops the ice
cold. Dr. Bentley figures that one ice stream he has studied
hasn't moved much since it hit a sticky spot during the Civil
War.
   This year, Dr. Bentley will hunt for sticky spots using
radar. He and his team plan to lay out 10 rectangular grids,
each consisting of 1,000 bamboo poles jammed into the snow
atop an ice stream. Then they will use a big tracked vehicle
to lug a radar antenna up and down the grid, looking for
radar patterns that signal a hard surface below.
   "Things are changing rapidly, and we don't have ways to
predict the future" of the ice sheet, Dr. Bentley says.
Hidden in the snows of Antarctica are some clues.
                                                                                                       

   A Cosmic Quest
                                                                                                       

   Just how cold is it at the South Pole?
   -- So cold they put heaters in walk-in refrigerators to
keep beer from freezing.
   -- So cold that most all the water vapor freezes, making
the Polar atmosphere drier than the Sahara's.
   The latter explains why two groups of cosmologists have
come to the South Pole in November -- springtime in
Antarctica -- when temperatures warm to 50 degrees below zero
and 30-mile-per hour winds blow. This is the best place on
Earth for studying the heavens, they explain, because the
drier the air, the better their telescopes can see the cosmic
radiation that bathes the planet.
   Scientists believe the radiation was produced about
500,000 years after the birth of the universe and is the key
to understanding the central paradox of cosmology. If the Big
Bang sent energy and matter hurtling outward uniformly in all
directions, how did stuff ever clump together, through
gravity, to form the galaxies and stars we see today?
Somewhere in the sky, the cosmic radiation must either be
more intense or hotter than other places -- marking sites
where galaxies formed.
   "Otherwise it's all magic," says George Smoot. Dr. Smoot,
a 45-year-old blithe spirit from Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
in California, leads a team of scientists from the West Coast
and Italy. Jeffrey Peterson, 36, leads the other team, from
Princeton University and several East Coast labs. The team
that finds the signal in the cosmic radiation that shows
galaxy formation -- or proves that a signal doesn't exist --
will have found the Holy Grail of cosmology.
   The Princeton team has come to the Pole every other year
since 1986. Every trip has brought calamity. The first year
they ran out of liquid helium to cool the telescope. In 1988,
their telescope broke as often as an old Ford. In 1990, they
ran out of liquid nitrogen, another coolant; this was the
only year they got any useful data, but just about half of
what they wanted. In 1991, a new government storage tank of
liquid nitrogen was supposed to supply the team, but one
night it exploded, shattering in two.
   The Berkeley team is having better luck. In 1989, the
team's telescope found an energy source powerful enough,
perhaps, to account for the birth of galaxies -- and now
they're back to make sure their measurements weren't
mistaken. Antarctica, they say, is Earth's clearest window to
the cosmos.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

