
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920302-0142
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920302-0142.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshlef:
   Man (and Dog) Against the Elements
   ----
   By Neil Ulman
</HL>
<DATE>
03/02/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   Will Steger, five other men and 36 dogs crossed Antarctica
in 1989-90. They advertised their derring-do as a showcase
for sponsors' equipment, a demonstration of international
cooperation, an educational enterprise and a way of drawing
attention to Antarctica and its environmental problems.
   Before all those goals, however, came "making it." And it
was surely the cooperative cleaving to that central purpose
that brought him and his companions through in the face of
considerable suffering and discouragement.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The Trans-Antarctica Expedition Mr. Steger writes about in
"Crossing Antarctica" (Knopf, 304 pages, $25) was born of the
ambitions of Mr. Steger and Jean-Louis Etienne, who met in
1986 in the middle of separate arctic journeys. Mr. Steger
was leading the first confirmed unsupported dog-sled
expedition to the North Pole and Dr. Etienne was making the
first solo ski there. They met in Mr. Steger's tent, shared
tea and their Antarctic dreams and exchanged phone numbers.
   But why would anyone back a trip to the South Pole, where
all the firsts seemed to have been garnered long ago?
Norwegian Roald Amundsen had been there first, followed a
month later by British Royal Navy Capt. Robert Scott in
December and January of 1911-12. More Britishers had crossed
Antarctica with tracked vehicles in 1958 and 1981. Another
trio had skied "in the footsteps of Scott" in 1986. What was
left? In answer, Messrs. Steger and Etienne decided to ski
and dog-sled across the continent by the longest possible
route, a trek that took them from July 27 until March 3.
   The success of Trans-Antarctica owed a lot to the pride,
resilience, determination and widely different skills and
personalities of the men involved: Geoff Somers, stubborn,
taciturn and wryly humorous, an expert dog-sled driver and
veteran of the British Antarctic Survey; Victor Boyarsky, a
boisterous, mercurial, Soviet glaciologist; Keizo Funatsu, a
quiet, conscientious Japanese with spiritual reserves,
devoted to his dogs; and Qin Dahe, a dedicated Chinese
scientist.
   When I traveled with these men and their dog teams for
three days in the Minnesota wilderness in February 1989, it
was Mr. Qin's first experience with skis, sled dogs or
communicating at length in the English language. Clearly no
athlete, his command of all three was shaky. None of that
bothered Mr. Steger, who was more interested in Mr. Qin's
fierce determination to share camp chores and pull his weight
in subzero cold. "Dahe will do well," Mr. Steger decided, a
judgment vindicated over 3,741 miles in windchills sometimes
approaching minus 100 degrees Fahrenheit.
   Mr. Steger is also a keen judge of dogs, who share equally
in the credit for Trans-Antarctica. Because their lives
depended on the dogs, the men knew them all intimately, their
strengths and foibles. They were inspired by their canine
colleagues and despaired when they sometimes wilted from
exhaustion. The death en route of Tim, half wolf, became the
focus of a rift between Messrs. Steger and Somers.
   The hardships that the party faced were tremendous, but
familiar polar fare. Men and dogs stumbled forward in snowy
whiteouts, fell into and rescued one another from crevasses.
Storms slowed them early and confined them to their tents for
days on the Antarctic Peninsula and buried some food caches
irretrievably under drifts of snow, gravely imperiling the
expedition. Bone-chilling head winds froze painful cracks in
their fingers and faces, sapping the strength of men and
dogs. Within 16 miles of the end, Mr. Funatsu stepped out in
a storm to tend his dog team and couldn't find his way back.
Feared dead, he was found 13 hours later, 300 feet from his
tent near a ditch he had scraped in the snow with a pair of
pliers.
   Trans-Antarctica faced such problems with a different
style than Amundsen, Scott, Ernest Shackleton and explorers
who traveled in an age when leaders gave orders and the rest
followed. Amundsen consulted his teammates but his leadership
was authoritarian, and the Scott expedition followed Royal
Navy traditions of command. Mr. Steger is a leader of a
different stripe: experienced, laid back, determined and
flexible. "Those who get into trouble in places like
Antarctica," he writes, "are those who . . . fall back on a
stringent system, either philosophical or physical. You must
be willing to bend. You cannot allow nature, or an
undertaking, to imprison you, no matter its rigors."
   As polar literature, Mr. Steger's account, written with
Jon Bowermaster, cannot equal the technical fascination of
Amundsen's "The South Pole." Nor can it approach the tragic
drama of Apsley Cherry-Garrard's "The Worst Journey in the
World," which recounts the death of Scott's party after much
agony only 11 miles from a cache of food and fuel. The
photographs are good, but lack the breathtaking scenery of "A
Walk to the Pole" by Roger Mear and Robert Swan.
   "Crossing Antarctica" succeeds, however, as a clear and
factual account of modern man pitting himself against the
elements, bending before the blast, suffering, sacrificing,
enduring and prevailing.
   ---
   Mr. Ulman is a news editor in the Journal's New York
bureau.
</TEXT>
</DOC>

